7 Words
Eavestrough n.
Parabola n.
Afoul adv.
Effulgence n.
Alacrity n.
Awesome adv.
Triolet n.
Noun phrase
The eavestrough sagged under the weight of seasons of neglect.
Noun phrase
The arc of the parabola was high.
Adverbial phrase
She had run afoul of the systems that regulated such things.
Adverbial phrase
The blindingly effulgent sun hurt his eyes.
Adjectival phrase
The awesome scale terrified the young man.
Verb phrase
She was preparing the cake with alacrity.
Adverbial phrase
She read the triolet loudly.
Under the weight of seasons of neglect, the eavestrough sagged.
The arc of the parabola was high.
She had run afoul of the systems that regulated such things.
The blindingly effulgent sun hurt his eyes.
The awesome scale terrified the young man.
She was preparing the cake with alacrity.
She read the triolet loudly.
eavestrough
Under the weight of seasons of neglect, pressed by rain and wind, drained of color by the sun’s relentless shine, the eavestrough sagged, bowed, and finally detached from the roof in a jarring and surprisingly quiet fall to the ground, landing with a low thud that would have seemed plain if you had only seen its aftermath, but that produced a dull sort of shock to those observing.
parabola
Given the height of the perch, the wind driving over the land, and the somewhat nauseating drop at the water’s edge, trying to guess where a rock might land when tossed seemed beyond the simple trick of tracing the arc of the parabola in space and beyond what the quadradic formula could predict.
afoul
She was aware of the impact of such a decision, understood that her choice could and likely would alter her life for some time, and knew that she did not care because this thing was wrong, had always been wrong, and would never change, she would run afoul of these systems always and without fear.
effulgent
The way he took over a room, took space, took oxygen, seemed to take away the physical limits of a room, that this could come from a man like him, that all it could take was a smile, that with a flash of teeth you could forget the rest and sink into that effulgent smile and forgive everything, because there was nothing else.
awesome
Beyond her ability to describe with words, this would stay with her forever, this place, this feeling, she did not know what to do with all of this input, the scale, the intensity, the edges of it so wide or maybe so unclear or both that it was physical, the awesomeness was something that took your breath, quickened your heart, and made you feel a hollowness knowing that you could never clearly explain it to someone else.
alacrity
While I had never been that happy, I often wondered what kind of life you had had to have to be like that, to be that intensely joyful, that enthusiastic about this world, about this particular time and place, to express alacrity without irony, to have “spirit” in all of its forms.
Package
When the doorbell rang, things started to happen inside the house, dogs jumped up and barked, cats hardly moved, and James ran to the door, eager to see if his package had finally arrived, eager to finally receive what he had been waiting for, to finally open the box and pull apart the packaging, to hold it and have it finally.
?
Eavestrough
The weight of the bird might have been the issue, but it seemed highly unlikely that such a small animal could be responsible for this.
The tiny bird—a wren maybe— had, moments earlier, been trying to get at some of the pretzel sticks in a bowl that had been set on a large blanket for the kids.
The assembled guests were mostly all at least vaguely aware of this small bird —a sparrow perhaps—as it flew away from the pretzel sticks, startled by something far too subtle for humans to notice, and landed gently on the edge of the roof of the small home.
Under the weight of seasons of neglect, pressed by rain and wind, drained of color by the sun’s relentless shine, the eavestrough sagged, bowed, and finally detached from the roof in a jarring and surprisingly quiet fall to the ground, landing with a low thud that would have seemed plain if you had only seen its aftermath, but that produced a dull sort of shock to those observing.
Parabola
Given the height of the perch, the wind driving over the land, and the somewhat nauseating drop at the water’s edge, trying to guess where a rock might land when tossed seemed beyond the simple trick of tracing the arc of the parabola in space and beyond what the quadradic formula could predict.
 These paths had more to do with jazz than Newtonian physics, more to do with dreams and dream logic than the logic of math that could predict this sort of thing.
These rocks, thrown out into the ocean, would in the end, at least hit the water.
Afoul
Some decisions, some choices, when seen from a distance, when seen being made by others can feel so totally alien, so totally at odds with what you can fathom that they seem impossible or unreal.
What circumstance could make a person come to such a conclusion? The speed at which things can happen that have such deep impacts on your life, that can alter everything about you, can make you re-examine every aspect of your life, that speed can punch a hole right through you and everything you thought you understood to be you.
She was aware of the impact of such a decision, understood that her choice could and likely would alter her life for some time, and knew that she did not care because this thing was wrong, had always been wrong, and would never change, she would run afoul of these systems always and without fear.
Effulgent
The way he took over a room, took space, took oxygen, seemed to take away the physical limits of a room, that this could come from a man like him, that all it could take was a smile, that with a flash of teeth you could forget the rest and sink into that effulgent smile and forgive everything, because there was nothing else.
Low self-esteem and a lot of wine and drugs could explain much of what people saw in him, but the smart ones wanted it to be more than that, needed it to mean something, needed for him and his undeniable flaws and obvious shortcomings to explain something, explain why they were there, why they chose this.
Awesome
Beyond her ability to describe with words, this would stay with her forever, this place, this feeling, she did not know what to do with all of this input, the scale, the intensity, the edges of it so wide or maybe so unclear or both that it was physical, the awesomeness was something that took your breath, quickened your heart, and made you feel a hollowness knowing that you could never clearly explain it to someone else.
That it would be absence that caused this, that the removal of all of the tethers of a normal life could make her feels this, was at once a profoundly liberating and cripplingly lonely.
Alacrity
While I had never been that happy, I often wondered what kind of life you had had to have to be like that, to be that intensely joyful, that enthusiastic about this world, about this particular time and place, to express alacrity without irony, to have “spirit” in all of its forms.
I bet it would be nice.
Being able to unselfconsciously put your hand into the center of a circle of people and “on three” say something meaningful together, that is probably a good way to be in the world.
Package
When the doorbell rang, things started to happen inside the house, dogs jumped up and barked, cats hardly moved, and James ran to the door, eager to see if his package had finally arrived, eager to finally receive what he had been waiting for, to finally open the box and pull apart the packaging, to hold it and have it finally.
It was someone else, someone that James did not care to talk to and did not care to explain why he could not, would not talk to them.
The delivery guy never rang the bell before, James knew that, and now felt silly and annoyed with himself for being so excited.
Graphic Design is not art Graphic design is not art
Graphic design is not art because it lacks the intention needed to be art, artists make art — not design, and it is not necessary for design to be art.
Graphic design does not intend to be art, so it is not art.
The category of artist exists separate from other forms of making, what they make is art, not design.
Art and design can and do happily live as separate things in the world; there is no need to conflate the two.
While some people in the field of graphic design may want that to mean they are artists, may feel that their role in culture or value in society would be elevated by this association, graphic design is not art, and graphic designers are not artists.
Sometimes art is difficult to recognize.
Robert Ryman painted a canvas white, and it was and is art; when you or I paint a canvas white, that is a nice empty canvas that can be painted on, but it is not art.
Rymans intention that he was creating art is one of the only things that differentiates his Tate gallery-worthy art and a tradesperson prepping the walls at the Tate to display his art.
Sometimes art is beautiful, some definitions of art make beauty a key element, but many things can be beautiful without intent.
A sunrise or set in your local areas destination to see such things can be beautiful, but it is not art.
No artist with intention created that scene; no art is there.
Similarly, numerous art museums display religious icons of various colonized and subjugated populations without consent as art, but these are not the maker’s intentions.
It is not art; it is a misunderstood and poorly presented piece of someone else’s culture that a curator has incorrectly cast as art.
Defining what is and is not art can be very easy, as Worhal said: “Artists make art.”
Graphic design, like art, is difficult to define.
It is a job title, a department that can be majored in at many schools, a problem-solving toolset, as well as many other things.
The range of work that is encompassed in this expansive and fuzzy definition is massive and constantly debated, but in very few of these definitions is making art a part of it.
Artists make art, not design.
Designers make a lot of things, but art is not generally what they are considered to produce.
Making art is not hard; it is not magic; it is not a precious thing.
It is someone making something, or thinking about something, or dancing in a hall with the lights out, or a bunch of people doing these or any number of things, with the intention of making art.
A graphic designer (or a plumber, or a police officer, or a middle-school principal, or anyone ever anywhere) can make art; they can say “this is art”, and it is very hard to say they are wrong.
Being a graphic designer does not preclude being an artist or making art.
People can be two things; they can be complex, and rich and full of contradictions, making art does not mean you can’t also be a graphic designer.
Design is not art, and it does not need to be art, and sometimes people make art — designers included.
Art demands intention and maybe little else.
Many things, nature, math, graphic designers, elephants, can make beautiful things, but this does not make it art.
Artists make art, and who is to say who gets to police that term? All sorts of people make all sorts of art, (some of it is trash, some of it is great, some of it is both) and designers should feel happy to include themselves in that, but not because they make clever or beautiful or meaningful work in their design practice.
Designers make design, but they can make art if they want to; they only need to intend to do it.
Is Art Design? ?
The difference between art and graphic design can sometimes be difficult to figure out, they often appear visually similar, they are often created by the same person, on the surface they can be twins.
 Art is a very big place, people do all sorts of things there, theater, dance, film, painting, sculpture, performance, all sorts.
Those types of art are hardly ever confused for design, it is the “fine” arts that can seem related if not the same when compared to design.
While at a certain distance art might seem like design; when we look closely at what design is for, who it is for, how it is talked about, and the commercial and professional structures that surround its creation and use, we see that art is not design.
The artists’ intention is one of the few things that can helpfully separate what is art from what is not.
We experience a massive amount of content every day, we see things, and hear and feel things that we might consider to be art in the vast and almost neverending scrolls of input.
These things, these experiences, these events, they can be beautiful, they can be meaningful, even move us, but without intention, they are not art.
The meaning may be up to the audience to decide, but the nature of the thing is not.
An artist can create a work of art, place it in a desk drawer, never show it to a single person, and then after his death have the work published, have it find an audience, have it succeed.
An artist can create, and that creation can go into the world where it can fail to find a home, it can fail to make an impact on anyone’s lives, it can be seen by very few or perhaps none, and that does not make it a failure as art.
Graphic designers create work for a very different group, they are not an audience that can discover the work by chance over the extended lifetime of a painting, they are a target, they are a group that is to be marketed to, they are researched, their views about and habits are understood.
Graphic design communicates to specific groups with specific messages for specific results —usually buying something.
The designer is not trying to communicate some deeply personal and profound message to an audience, they are trying to communicate very particular messages from the client to the target market.
The intention of the artist is a key element of what makes something art.
The motivation to start a piece of work can be almost anything that the artist cares to be moved by.
The artist makes a choice to explore their idea about a topic, they tell their story.
The graphic designer does not make for these reasons, and they don’t tell their own stories, they tell the story of the client or the story of the product or service the client is selling.
They tell the story of family positive paper plates, exciting salad dressing, institutions that “really get you”, and want to be your friend, they tell the story that the client wants to be told.
The client and designer relationship is something that art does not need to worry about, art can tell whatever story the artist wants to tell, they do not have to show an ROI with increased click-through rates.
Clients are half of the relationship on a design project, they are the reason the project exists, they are often very good at what they do, and with that partnership comes client feedback.
Throughout art school, artists and designers participate in a rarefied review process called critique where instructors look deeply at the techniques, ideas, creativity, and craft and provide feedback, both positive and negative, regarding the presented work.
This is a teaching tool; it is a way to learn about making and improve with the guidance of a trusted teacher (sometimes crit.
can mean spirited or vague to the point of emptiness.) In the professional practice of graphic design, this critique process is replaced with client presentations.
Client presentations exist in various forms but are usually similar in that work (in a finished or unfinished state) is shown to the client (often numerous people who the designer has had no contact with are present at these), and feedback is solicited.
The caring, talented, and supportive art teacher is replaced with the client, who has very different interests, needs, and skill set than the art teacher.
Here every decision made by the designer can be questioned (this is a valuable process, I only highlight it as something very different than critique in art), the strength of the design and the designer’s reasons are placed against the likes and dislikes of the client, against the willingness of the client to try something new.
In the worst-case scenarios, the piece is edited and chopped up to meet the likes of the client instead of what the designer believes will resonate with the target group, type sizes will change imperceptibly, the ideas of one design will be applied to another, the structures of a different successful design will be forced into the work.
This kind of feedback highlights something very different about the artist and the designer, and that is whose idea is being expressed.
The client relationship and the service-based structures that graphic design exists inside of have also led to very specific practices as the industry has become professionalized over time.
Errors and omissions insurance, end-user license agreements for fonts, signed back portfolio display use rights; as the graphic design industry has become more professionalized, as it becomes more of an industry, it has added layers and layers of rules and structures.
If it is even possible for an artist to make a factual mistake in an artwork, the consequences of that error would be debatable, it is art, it is not reporting, it is not legally binding in any way.
Graphic design on the other hand often works inside of a strange cross-hatched space of professional and litigious, and creative and imaginative.
Some of the materials that a designer might work on have legal consequences if mistakes are made (as an example if the earnings of a company are reported incorrectly in an annual report that is a legal problem and one of the reasons errors and omissions insurance exist) this is not a problem shared by an artist.
The professionalization has further moved design into a commercial service industry with all of the legal implications that bring.
It has also brought about teams of people working on a project, the specialization of roles, and managers.
The complexity of a modern design project can be incredibly daunting, depending on its scale.
Projects can involve hundreds of people, millions of dollars, and multiyear timelines, and with that comes the need for specialized skilled teams, team leaders, managers, and directors.
The teams become so large that you find yourself reviewing org charts to figure out who needs to approve a design internally.
While some art (film, theater, dance, music) might require this kind of specialized group, Kara Walker or Robert Rauschenberg are not meeting with project managers to review Gant charts for upcoming project reviews.
Artists work in a different structure than designers, a structure that does not require large organized teams or the organizational systems that that system requires.
The professionalization that had changed the nature of design over time, the commercialization of the work, the structures that organize a designers work also have impacted and changed how we think about who owns the design.
Artists own their work, someone might buy it from them, and then they own the work.
Art can be lent out, it can be licensed for other use, it can be traded and sold, it might go to auction, but the ownership of the work is understood.
There is a range of how designers deal with ownership, some retain ownership of the design providing only print-ready files for the particular instance of the design, others transfer ownership rights to the client and only have portfolio rights signed back, others have no contracts and hope everything will work out.
And that only applies to an individual designer.
When you are working with a team of designers who owns the rights to work you create? When you have a complex org chart and clients, who owns the work created by the designer.
This ownership issue is complicated by copyright law, a lack of professional practice teaching in our schools, and bad precedents in graphic designs recent history.
When we talk about famous designers throughout our history we never talk about the help they received from other designers, Stefan Sagmeister is a famous designer, but the army of interns making the work in the studio is unknown.
I once saw a talk by the famous graphic designer Rod McDonald in which he said, “A famous graphic designer is like a famous dentist.” The most famous graphic designer in the world could walk down almost any street in the world and not be noticed.
Celebrating the stars of graphic design is not of interest to most people, while the work of some designers might be famous, the associated designer is almost never known to anyone outside of the industry.
The art world celebrates artists, the work in important, but the artists are the thing to be lauded.
The artist tells a personal story in some manner, and that is important to us, a designer tells us someone else’s story to try and get us to do something or buy something and that is of little interest to us.
Art and design are not the same thing, but they do not preclude one another either, they just happen for different reasons.
The intention of the artist to create a work of art is something that is fundamentally different than the intention of the designer.
The designer is telling someone else’s story, to a specific group for a specific purpose.
A design piece can measurably fail to do the thing it was intended to do.
The designer reacts to feedback from clients and their marketing firms, and sometimes the client’s friend whose opinion of visual things they respect, they make changes that are requested by the client.
And that is fine, the designer is working with a client to tell their story, that is the nature of the graphic design industry.
Clients hire well known or respected firms that have a professional practice and follow industry standards, that firm employs a host of specialized professionals to create designs that tell the clients story to the right people.
The designer moves part of that story along, they usually don’t own that part of the story and will likely never be recognized as having been part of it.
Art is not design, but artists can be designers, designers can be artists, just not at the same time.
5 designers that challenge, subvert, and disobey
Five designers have influenced how I work, what I make, and how I think about that work and what I am making.
They create work that challenges, subverts, and disobeys.
They add a conscious to an industry that can seem like it only exists to make money.
Saul Bass woke me up to what design was and how it could change the way I saw and the way I represented the world in my designs.
Banksy created clever and compelling political work that poked at power.
James Hartfield created the bravest work I had ever seen and created dangerous work that challenged the Nazis.
Evan Roth showed that you can do smart political design and art and have fun doing it.
James Bridle combined elements of these others to create work that explored ways of thinking and making work that was subversive, fun, and brave.
These are the designers that I have most admired in my career.
Saul Bass was the first graphic designer I had ever heard of.
I did not know what graphic design was when I was younger, I did not know where album art came from, where the graphics on my skateboard, the covers of books, the things I interacted with every day came from.
The categories of the designed world or the places I understood that had a visual component, places like movies, pop music, clothes, they seemed like special parts of culture that just inherently had cool pictures associated with them.
The design of things, for the most part, did not stand out, and when it did—PeeWee Herman, the Talking Heads, Duran Duran— it was always in support of a more significant thing, and I thought that thing just drove all of the surrounding parts.
Design just happened; lighting, hair and makeup, editing, the things that when they are done well seem natural and unremarkable, part of the whole, in support of the real thing.
But sometimes those things that are always in the background shift focus and before the thing, the bass player becomes the frontman, the editing technique becomes the structure of the film, or Saul Bass creates the title sequence for Cape Fear in 1991, and those things become front and center, they become the focus.
I did not notice what graphic design was or did until I say Cape Fear around 1991 on video, but I have always been able to recall the jarring and unnerving feeling when the water turns red during that movie’s title sequence.
After that, I started to understand the world a little differently.
The title sequence in the 1991 film Cape Fear by Saul and Elaine Bass stood out so dramatically when I saw it that it stuck with me forever.
I had not seen anything like it, it was intense, it was strange, it was new.
Images reflected on a shimmering ocean, fading in and out, then the water turns red, and a photo negative of Robert DeNiro fades in, and the screen goes to black and white.
That dramatic use of the color red is picked up throughout the film, and it was so startling to me, I did not know that movies (anything) could do that, that you could break from realism to aggressively, you could just turn a scene red and make it more than just real.
I am not sure that I have ever actually seen the movie Psycho, but growing up in the ’80s and ’90s, it was one of those cultural references that were so common that you did not have to have seen it to know about it.
The things I did know about it were the shower scene was important, and that the title sequence was iconic.
Finding out that Saul Bass had created that sequence and had helped or maybe even directed that scene transformed him for me into something profound.
The same person was shaping these things; it was planned and developed and produced by the same person that made the water red.
I still did not know what graphic designers were, but I was aware of the impact that at least one of them was making.
The thing that made these things important to me was what this was all in support of; movies.
Movies are my favorite cultural output, more than art, architecture, dance, movies are the most compelling and exciting and impactful.
Jessica Hische is a great and very talented graphic designer, her daily drop caps project is iconic for younger designers, but the most impact she has ever had, her most seen work, is the work she did on the Wes Anderson film Moonrise Kingdom.
The intro to the film Philadelphia by Pablo Ferro is an amazingly simple combination of a script font over a montage of scenes from the city, but what makes it into something powerful and impactful is the original song by Bruce Springsteen.
Film allows design to impact a story and add dimension, subtly as in Philadelphia or more forcefully as in Cape Fear, but the design is also elevated.
Most designers do not get to work with an original song by a famous musician to add to the story they are telling, they do not get to work with a director and film crew to create a narrative.
Being a part of that story, having a huge audience react to your work, people being so invested in the narrative that you are helping to tell that they put up your poster advertising the thing.
Graffiti in Toronto in the mid-1990s was very popular and very visible.
The impact that an artist could have on my daily commute while passing a high visibility wall was fantastic.
Passengers on the subway system crossing the Bloor viaduct at that time could see a wide range of work in various styles, skill levels, scales, but always with spray-paint and always without permission.
This time was where I learned about the high and low in art, about the high end of low, and the low end of high.
I found the idea of these parallel systems to be awesome.
I had never contemplated an entire environment and structure that supported and regulated art, but that had nothing to do with galleries, art dealers, agents, and openings.
These were two art worlds that existed with little intersection, neither better than the other in theory.
In practice, this was not true, Keith Haring did not get arrested, and a lot of graffiti was more interested in form and style than overt commentary or message.
During this time, artists like Shepard Fairey and Banksy were starting to be more influential and get more attention.
Banksy stood out from other graffiti artists because of the political content of their work.
Direct cultural critique and civil disobedience in a striking visual display, this work was important to me, and I saw a way to create something with impact without selling anything.
Creating this kind of communication in a public space, outside of the traditional commercial system, at scales that generally are reserved for corporations, this felt liberating and disobedient.
Being a starving artist so that you could explore light and shadow, or express your physical gestures in space with abstraction always seemed like an awful trade-off.
But to work successfully in the arts, it felt like the opposite end of the spectrum was all that all available, you made corporate art for rich people that told the story they wanted telling.
To see these same sorts of communication tools be used in opposition to perceived injustice and to do it because the artist felt it was important to say changed how I wanted to work and be in the world.
The other thing that Banksy did was show me a way to be funny and smart and to try and tell meaningful stories with a skill set that I had.
Being funny and somewhat smart tends to drive people into advertising, it is the safest place to be clever for a job.
I was heading that direction, but seeing funny and smart used like Banksy was using them blew up any interest I had in commercial advertising.
While in school, I saw the bravest art I had ever seen, posters showing Hitler eating the fortunes of the German people and turning into excrement, anti-war, anti-Nazi posters, and newspaper covers created by a German in Germany under the Third Reich.
John Hartfield was the first artist in the history I was learning that I understood, I could relate to his motivations, the drive to make what he was making.
Hartfield and a few others that seemed like trouble makers, making work to challenge something, trying to show something important that people in power did not want to be shown.
Through small acts of defiance or bold and dangerous art, these artists made graphic design valuable, not just a way to sell condos in a rapidly gentrifying neighborhood, or create an internal branding document for private jails.
Graphic design could have a positive impact on the world.
The thing that I did for my work and school was not evil, or at least it was not inherently so.
It could be brave and look fantastic.
Hartfield’s photomontages and collages also challenged my ideas about what good graphic design looked like, what tools it used, and the visibility of the designer in the work.
Collage always has a lineup of people ready to dismiss its value as art and communications.
The first barrage explains that it is a kid’  skid’s playtime game, it is not serious, it is at best for non-serious, non-artists to make scrapbooks, or wedding planning mood boards.
Serious graphic designers do not do these things, and to express interest in these is to show that you are not a serious graphic designer.
The next level of attack on the collage states that while it was once a serious thing when Dadaists were breaking art wide open and challenging the bourgeoise notions of art, then, when it was new, when it juxtaposed images in ways people had never seen, then it was valuable.
But that moment is past, no one is surprised and shocked by conflicting images smashed together.
I see the jarring, protesting images of Hanna Hoch and Hartfield as vibrant and compelling as anything produced in the last 50 years.
That commercial advertising has absorbed and repackaged every form of protest art to sell some type of edgy lifestyle product does not mean that collage is emptied out of value.
Collage is still messy and explosive and energetic, and surprising.
The space outside of publications, outside of the tv, outside of things that I can close or turn off, the public space has been taken over by corporate media in more and more invasive ways.
Large scale projections of advertising messages, stickering, wheat pasting, graffiti, and more are used as tools of advertising to sell us things in our outdoors, in our shared public spaces.
When the city of Vancouver hosted the Olympics, it became illegal to have a Pepsi logo in your window if your apartment was in the Olympics areas of the city, because Coca-Cola was an official sponsor.
Pizza shops with ancient Athenian themes had to change their names, public space ceased to be, and every surface was on brand.
Evan Roth, as a founding member of the Graffiti Research Lab, formed in a hallway at EyeBeam in 2007, focused on creating tools and techniques to fight against corporate interests in media.
He was not just refusing to participate in a system he thought was hurting people, he actively worked against it.
Evan Roth said that the G.R.L.
was supposed to be like Q in James Bond, they would develop tools for the graffiti artists to make them 007 levels of efficient.
The focus on technology was something I had not encountered often in the graphic design world, the tool was not important, it was the designer and their ideas that mattered.
I found that by focusing on technologies like conductive paint, projectors, or rare Earth magnets Roth and others created some of the most creative solutions I had ever seen.
The focus on tools and making seemed similar to what Hartfield was doing with photomontage, it was experimental and innovative and exciting.
Using these techniques to create public space art projects was incredibly fun.
You could set up a mobile projector using techniques developed by Roth and create interactive spaces that would allow the public to create messages at massive scales without needing permission or vast sums of money, and it would feel like a party, it was fun, people would say mundane things, funny things, sad things, it did not feel like work.
Exploring new tools, creating novel uses for them, building something new that was fun to use and share, this energized me and made me think about how I wanted to work inside of the design industry again.
Roth’  sRoth’s work in public spaces and his questioning about who gets to use it is very compelling.
That almost every surface is for sale in most cities, that corporations can purchase the naming rights to a publicly funded building, that cities will rent out the publics space for organizations like the Olympics is so common that talking about it makes you seem like an angry crank promoting communism.
But when you look at São Paulo after they based the Clean City Law in 2006, you can see how much of our cities and our views that we give up without even thinking that it was ever ours to have.
Public space art often works to just remind people who owns the city, that municipalities do not have to look the way they do; they do not need to sell what is the publics.
The digital enters into our physical worlds more and more every day.
This crosshatching of spaces, digital and physical can create interesting and strange occurrences that can be artworks, glitches that can be meaningful and compelling; spam emails can be poetic, auto-completes the best satire.
As children of the very early internet and the Nintendo entertainment systems 8-bit images started to create new art and design, these visual grammars crossed over from the digital into the physical.
The space between the digital and the real became thinner and thinner.
The artist James Bridle coined this crosshatched new art and design style, the New Aesthetic.
A semi unified set of design ideas and theories was being developed while I watched was compelling, seeing a new movement of art and design forming, it seemed and maybe, in fact, was important.
This was a new way of thinking about the work, a new way of talking about it, a new way of thinking about what it even was in the first place.
And new ways of thinking, talking, and doing are not very common.
Graphic design, as an industry, has a hard time figuring out seriously it wants to take itself.
Does its history extend to the earliest letterforms and the structure of the written word? Are the 14thC printers in China and Korea innovating printing techniques part of the history? Or does it start with the long 19th century and exist as a tool of modern capitalism and propaganda.
What should the role of academia be in the industry? How serious is this? I hope that it matters, I want to take it seriously because I don’t want to be wasting my time selling things to people they don’t want or need.
Bridle takes the work seriously, the impact, implications, feedback, ideas, he thinks about it all and talks about it like someone who cares.
While talking about design theory, or the application of modern critical theory can be embarrassingly difficult in some design circles, it is becoming more common to think carefully and deeply about what design is and what it does, and for whom.
Once current critical theory is the lens in which you are looking at almost anything, it becomes infinitely more complex than when you started and always becomes political.
Bridle has been able to explore the political elements of digital cameras’ facial detection algorithms, architectural renderings, and the shadows of U.S.
military drones; his work is always political because all of our work is political.
The same seriousness that design deserves academically it deserves politically.
The industry is a significant component of our current economic and political systems, design helps to sell new things, and helps to simplify and polish messages and content.
Bridle uses his work to highlight and communicate about the implications of U.S.
military campaigns, climate disasters, and ideas of citizenship.
Like Roth, Banksy, and Hartfield, Bridle foregrounds the importance of non-commercial work that challenges our assumptions in his practice, moving back and forth between that crosshatched space between design, art, and something new, something futuristic and hopefully valuable.
It is estimated that 47% of the jobs that exist in North America right now could be replaced by machines with current technology.
People working in the creative fields, the designer, writers, curators, editors, and the rest think that this does not apply to them, and they will likely feel that way even after the work they did has been automated.
Computers made a significant impact on graphic design, but it did not fundamentally shift how we think about the work.
The tools basically just digitized the physical tools the industry had been using for around 200 years.
InDesign still has the option to work in points and picas as if we are using an advanced letterpress, Photoshop has burn and dodge tools that mimic the darkroom, they are just digital approximations, they are not new ideas.
James Bridle has sought to understand the current and coming world and designs impacts on it.
The New Aesthetic and Bridles personal work has often explored the role of technology on ourselves and how we see the world, how we see ourselves in it, and how technology sees us and that world.
These different views of the world can make for an interesting starting point to think about design and designers’ roles.
James Bridles is making the kind of work I want to make.
The blend of academic, creative, political, and technological to create something that lives in the crosshatched space of art and designs overlap is where I want to work.
While Saul Bass, James Hartfield, Banksy, and Evan Roth have all inspired me with the work they have done and the role that they have played in design and art, James Bridle has changed the way I see graphic design, art, politics, and technology.
The work of Bass, Hartfield, Banksy, Roth, and Bridle seems to sit in a space between graphic design and art.
They are using the grammar and tool of design, but in ways that subvert them, in ways that play with the audience’s understanding of systems they feel fluent in.
That sort of challenging of the underlying systems of our culture, the questioning of norms and normative behaviors, the bending, breaking, and questioning of rules for me makes design so much more interesting, valuable, and worth our times, worth studying and making an academic pursuit from.
I often struggled with being a graphic designer, wanting instead to have been an artist, a painter possibly.
I wanted to tell my stories and express my ideas; I wanted my creative thoughts and feelings to be important.
I don’t feel that way anymore.
Now I want to challenge systems, question norms, and fight against power, not for myself (or at least not only for myself), not because I might gain, but because power, norms, and systems will always need fighting against.
Chris Hedges says ““I do not fight fascists because I will win, I fight fascists because they are fascists.”” If I can make fun, smart, challenging work with the tools and skills of graphic design and do something even close to what Bass, Hartfield, Banksy, Roth, and Bridle have done, I will feel content in my work and the world.
Graphic design is a job not a lifestyle.
Growing up, I wanted to be an artist, but painting, sculpting, photographing, these things are incredibly difficult to do well, it takes years of practice to even properly handle the tools well.
Growing up I also knew that I could not work hard at something I did not care about, I could not make it through even a shift as a server in a busy restaurant, I could not enter data, I could not be bored or exhausted in my work.
I was lucky enough to stumble into graphic design, and it was a near-perfect fit, it is not hard work, it is creative and artistic, and it is such a wide-ranging industry that you can find a corner that is just right for you.
I have been a graphic designer for almost 20 years.
I have mostly worked in small studios and in-house during that time, and I taught at a couple of colleges during times of economic collapse.
I am not a famous designer, but I am pretty good at the work and have no reason to lie to you when I say that if you are a graphic designer starting out in the industry, that graphic design should not be your life.
Graphic design does not need or deserve your sacrifice, very few careers do—pediatric surgeons and bridge engineers are probably the only two that you should really think about giving up your weekends for—even if the industry tells you (or just strongly hints) that you should “live, breath and eat” your career path.
Anyone can be a graphic designer, you don’t have to have iconic hair, or funny glasses, or wear all black, you don’t have to follow all of the rules, (they are worth learning, the rules, because the industry does tend to value them a lot, and breaking them well can be fun for various reasons, like bugging people who are easily bugged by trivial things that they think are very important being done differently), you don’t need to live design.
Generally, designers often do have funny quirks, and it can be pleasant to be surrounded by people who also have equally funny quirks, (I like a particular pen that is a little hard to find, I prefer to use that one kind of pen, in the real world that might be seen as odd, in design it is almost a badge of honor).
Still, you can also just be boring vanilla, you can spend your time being you and not trying to perform the role of a designer all of the time.
It is a job, not a lifestyle, and it is a pretty easy job most of the time.
Graphic design, for the most part, is not very hard work.
If you can remove the outside elements that might make a designer feel stressed out about budgets, timelines, and job security, the work itself is not hard.
You don’t have to have a degree, (though a lot of businesses seem to think that it is essential, it is not, but it is a pretty good low barrier to applicants and works to ensure a certain level of skill and quality in theory), you don’t need to be certified, you don’t need to continuously train like doctors or architects.
Once you know the basics of the tools (which you can learn easily through online courses) and have read a handful of the important books of the industry (a quick google search will give a good starting point), you are on your way.
You will get better with time and practice, and ideally, you will keep learning, and you will develop into a good designer, and it will take some time, but it will not be harder than a week of shifts working in the service industry.
Being creative and coming up with novel solutions to communications problems can also be fun, being creative often is.
Being valued for your ideas and creative contributions makes work feel incredibly easy, knowing that you solved a problem in a novel way that it came from your head or heart or both is very affirming, empowering, and exciting.
Most jobs are miserable, they are not fulfilling, they are not fun, creative, passionate, impactful or important, they are jobs.
That is one of the massive appeals of graphic design work, you are paid like a professional and get to live like an artist, you can to create exciting, beautiful, impactful and possibly meaningful work.
People will see what you can make, they will interact with your ideas, they will be changed by your creativity.
If you have to work, then you could do far worse than a job in graphic design.
You can be valued for your mind, you can be creative and solve problems, you can change people’s minds about things.
You also don’t have to sacrifice your life, family, and relationships to make a career in design, it is not hard work, it does not need your entire life, you can be a whole person (and in fact, you will find that designers you meet that are just that, fully dedicated graphic designers, they are the most boring people you will ever meet or work with) and create great things, clever things, sad things, you can use your creativity and draw on your rich, full life and it’s not even very hard to do well.
?
Graphic designers, do something more interesting or robots will destroy you.
Graphic designers, do something more interesting or robots will destroy you.
40% of jobs can be replaced by machines using the technology we have as of this writing (Nov 2019).
 Machine learning, neural networks, and artificial intelligence are becoming faster, cheaper, and easier to use, and they are being used to replace human workers .
News reports of warehouse workers, long haul truck drivers, and fast food service workers being replaced by computers and robots have been frequent, but there seems to be a belief that it is only these kinds of “low skill” jobs that are at risk, that people that work in creative fields will be safe from this sort of replacement.
Most graphic designers that I know think that what we do cannot be done by machines.
I do believe that whatever creativity is (and its difficult to define nature may be the main reason that robots will find it challenging to be creative) will be something that machines will have trouble replicating is any real way, but what graphic designers seem to neglect in that equation is that a lot of the work that we do is not very creative, novel, or difficult to replicate.
Much of my day-to-day work is algorithmic (page layouts and typesetting), our industries history is often taught as a style-guide to be mined for aesthetics to be repurposed, a very large part of the work created is what Michael Beirut says “looks like graphic design”  but is in fact not doing the creative problem-solving work that is what graphic design claims to be doing.
Robots are going to replace a lot of what we currently consider to be graphic design, but that is going to be a good thing.
If your job can be replaced by a machine, then it is work that you should not be wasting your time and imagination on.
When I am setting up a page for an extended text document I do the following: pick an appropriate page shape (historically interesting or mechanically necessary), decide on appropriate margins, calculate a type size based on the measure, pick a leading that looks good with my typeface and measure, and set my baseline grid—there are a lot more steps I run through depending on a number of variables, I have written a script to automate a lot of them that I use InDesign when I do this.
I run this algorithm quite often.
I create paragraph styles to apply to large chunks of text easily.
I work programmatically, I was taught in school through Bringhurst, Tschichold, Müller-Brockmann, and others to work this way.
Software has made it easier and faster to do these sets of steps.
We are already working algorithmically; these steps don’t need a human brain considering them; as we work currently, we are just a slow computer carrying out an algorithm we are taught.
Machine learning requires a data set to train on.
It can be a simple set like photos with people smiling vs.
people not smiling, and with a large enough data set, the machine can learn what the differences look like and then be sent out to look for photos of people smiling in a new data set.
The way that many designers use art and graphic design history is not that different.
It is viewed as a data set to be drawn from and used as a style guide, mined for aesthetic value, and repurposed out of context and without an idea to support it.
We copy designs to better understand the thinking of the original designer, to learn how they might have come to the conclusions they did, and then we can apply that thinking to our work.
In practice, the detailed consideration of the work is passed by, and the simplest and most obvious aesthetic traits are copied and translated to new tools that have nothing to do with any aspect of the original designs’ creation.
What is created is an out of place icon empty of any meaning beyond simple nostalgia, but also full of misplaced meaning that can have unintended impacts.
That a machine can do this faster is not really a plus for our industry or world, but it is another example of where robots can do this work faster, and a call for history courses to really push to focus on historical context and not aesthetics if we want our history to be anything more than an unconsidered style guide.
Michael Beirut, in a talk, said that the problem with a lot of the work we produce as an industry is that it merely “looks like graphic design.” This does bring up a larger problem around a lack of clarity of what graphic design is and what it is supposed to do, but I think at its most basic the idea that design should solve a communication problem using words and images is generally agreeable.
Beirut’s critique is that the majority of what we are producing is not actually solving any communication problems, it just looks that way.
Applying current design trends to a project regardless of fit, regardless of its ability to solve a problem, is not graphic design.
Combing the history of design to find a clever design and then translating that without reason beyond the aesthetic is not graphic design, but most people won’t know the difference.
We have to stop doing this kind of work if we want to continue because this is precisely what you can train a machine to make.
Robots are not creative, they are not able to make interesting connections we can make that lead to something new and exciting, but they can make things that look like graphic design.
Organizations that invest in graphic design are more profitable, do better recovering from recessions, and are more resilient to the impacts of economic change .
Based on that information, some sort of invisible hand of the markets should mean more and more money is invested in hiring talented designers to solve specific communications; in practice, it would seem that the market is, in fact, always trying to pay less and get more.
Stock photography companies and the technological ease of producing photography that is passible for most uses devastated the commercial photography industry.
The images were worse, anyone could license the same images, they were not specific to a project, but they mostly worked, and they were very cheap.
That the product at the end was not as good did not matter, the price turned out to be all that was of interest to the organizations using them.
Graphic design has similar pressures now, a google search for “logo design” + free returns over 88 million results.
A site like 99 Designs promotes unpaid work and competitions as a format.
When machines are capable of making things that look close enough for companies to not look foolish for using them, they will abandon human designers for this cheaper option.
Recently while working on a small project, I spent some time looking for an automated solution for an aspect of the project that seemed like it was going to be slow, boring, and painstaking.
I was going to have to move a lot of anchor points by hand, and I was sure that someone else must have already solved this problem.
I asked another designer if they knew of a solution for this, and they angrily responded that “that is the work.” This detail-oriented, painstaking, handmade work is often fetishized and romanticized in our industry.
I was told with pride by a designer that they hand kern every letter pair when typesetting books, another that only discussed measurements in points and picas, and another that insisted that every good typographer has 5 versions of Garamond for specific uses.
When we fetishize our work this way, when we insist that these small details “are the work”, when we forget that the rules are arbitrary we become inaccessible to everyone, we dismiss non-designers ideas, we get angry that people don’t understand or appreciate our hard work, and we isolate ourselves while clients look for easier ways to get the help they need.
This insistence that the esoteric details are why we are valuable, that our refined and trained taste and knowledge of details that are invisible to anyone not trained to see them is the thing that makes us worthwhile and not our problem-solving abilities is one of the reasons that we will be replaced by machines.
Those details are not why people engage design; they do not solve anyone’s problems.
The good part about all of this is that robots will and should take over doing the parts of our work that are boring, rote, time-consuming, and a waste of creative potential.
Designers can then focus on solving problems, they can be clever, they can make new connections and innovate.
Schools can teach design history more deeply and thoroughly, they can explore context, ask why a technique was developed or used, and as Ed Fella poster said “rules are taught to be broken only exceptionally,” we can copy aesthetics less and focus on new ideas.
Robots can currently create new Rembrandt paintings that are flawless , they can write cookbooks (badly so far) , they can take in our cultural output and make connections we have never made, but it is going to take a long time before they can be creative and that is what designers should be focused on.
If we are going to continue to make mediocre work that does not solve problems but looks nice, if we are going to mine our history only for form, if we are going to hide in our belief that our specialized knowledge and techniques are irreplaceable then we should start packing up our desks because robots are for sure going to put us out of business.
So, we should make worthwhile work, try to learn about why our history looks the way it does, and focus on the things we do that robots can’t do better.
?
Art crimes and the case for the inclusion of graffiti into the graphic design cannon
Art crimes and the case for the inclusion of graffiti into the graphic design cannon
Graphic design is often understood as a neutral or even positive influence on the world (see AIGAs Design for Good ), when it is harmful it is not really graphic design, it is something else, it is propaganda, or it is being misused by a marketing department for suspect reasons.
Design is seen as a positive influence on the commercial world, and that is assumed to mean it is a positive influence generally.
Designers themselves tend to think of themselves as being and doing “good.” I think this is one of the reasons that the graffiti is so often ignored and overlooked by the design industry generally and design history specifically.
Graffiti is seen and described as a crime, it negatively affects a community or neighborhood, it is a “broken window,” and this is not what “we” as graphic designers do, our work, our billboards, posters, window treatments, storefront signs, these are a positive to the community and are doing good, or at worst they are neutral.
This contrast, when considered with an open and critical mind, brings into high relief, the assumptions we make about the positive impacts of our work, and the negative impacts of graffiti.
One is seen as property crime, and the other is studied in schools and rewarded with money and literal awards.
The addition of graffiti as an area of study in graphic design history would be a great step towards a history that viewed graphic design and graphic design history as a more than a simple narrative of always forward progress.
The inclusion of graffiti to our design history could present a complex, messy, interesting, and rich mixture of histories, cultures, ideas, and people; it could focus on a wider range of artists and designers than those that have been traditionally considered to be important.
Almost every aspect of graffiti contrast what we are taught to think of graphic design as, it is non-commercial (it is in most cases illegal), it is inherently political, it exists outside of traditional models of commercial value, it does not follow the rules of “good” design, and is it created by poor people of color.
When graffiti is discussed in our design histories, the names that you are most likely to read about are Shephard Fairey, Banksy, or Keith Haring.
None of the work of these three artists is what would be generally understood as a graffiti writer.
From the choice of tools such as wheat pasting posters or stencils used by Banksy, to the content of the Obey project by Fairey, to the style of Haring, these three white men that have been celebrated in art and design history present a version of graffiti that is palatable to a graphic design view of the world.
The vast majority of graffiti is still created by young, poor men of color using cans of spray-paint, and when they are caught painting, they are arrested, the work is not considered thoughtfully, it is not written about, is not celebrated.
Graphic design has struggled to define itself for years, the range of skill sets, types of work and the varied outputs of this loosely defined group have been debated in AIGA and GDC meetings for at least the 20 years I have been watching, but to look at our history books you find an incredibly narrow view of who we are and what we do.
History may be conservative structurally, and some very good design history books have given voice to underrepresented groups, but a full embrace of this very American, very political, and very challenging art could test our assumptions about who we are, what we are doing, and what we want to be doing.
Modern graffiti as an art style was invented and defined in urban centers across America by poor, young people of color .
It has its roots in the rise of hip-hop as one of the pillars of that style and culture.
To continue to exclude and ignore graffiti as a legitimate and important art style from our history and study as graphic designers reinforce our narrow understanding of who we are, it limits our range of understanding, of technique, of tooling, and of meaning.
Graphic design could have larger impacts on the world if it could view itself as something other than commercial art.
I think that graphic design history and education has ignored modern graffiti because it fundamentally does not understand it.
The language, meaning, motivations, techniques, and tools are complex and require effort to lean, the structures and knowledge of graffiti are not a simple translation to those of graphic design.
In an attempt at inclusion or possibly just an attempt to define what was acceptable to the larger art and design world the new term “street art” was applied to some graffiti writers, marking them as something else than a criminal or vandal and granting them entrance to “high art.” It is not a term used by graffiti writers.
The ideas behind “getting up,” which is a large motivation in graffiti writing , are complicated.
These motivations can be about making a personal impact on the world in a system that has atomized the poor and has taken away many of the levers of power an individual has, it can be personal and civil disobedience against a set of rules you find yourself living inside of that seem arbitrary and cruel, it can be about achieving success in the eyes of people that you respect, but it is not about money, it is not about a career, it is not about being valued by the rich, the powerful, or the elite (academic or art or other).
In the same way the design historians may exclude graffiti due to a lack of knowledge; the graphic design studio classes ignore its tools and techniques as well.
Tagging (the very fast writing of the writers’ name usually with a marker or spray paint) is what many tend to think of when discussing graffiti, but tagging is only one of a number of outputs such as black books, stickering, throwups, wheat pasting, and pieces, each of these has a range of styles and techniques.
The techniques employed in even the most basic output of tagging have an exponentially complex variety of paths to take, the writer can pick from various styles of type illustration matched with a choice of marking tool from off-the-shelf markers to homemade “drippy markers” to cans of spray paint, to much more exotic homemade tools, the technique, the style, and the tools are then matched with a substrate.
The visual styles of graffiti are also concerned with very different things than graphic design.
Ideas of legibility and readability, of audience, of scale, of reproducibility all exist in various ways in graffiti, but they have such different end goals that they consider to be important than graphic design that those same terms become exploded and full of very different meanings.
A historical or technical study of graffiti could also have a great impact on type illustration.
Jessica Hische, Laura Worthington, and Marian Bantjes are three of the best-known type illustrators and hand letterers in current graphic design and while Bantjes work is extraordinary and challenging Hische and Worthington produce beautifully designed historical restorations that focus on traditional calligraphy and Edwardian pen arts styles.
Graffiti is primarily about type illustration; it is focused on letters, whether complex handwritten letterforms or huge highly designed murals that are full of color, shape, and texture similar to those found in devotional works like the Book of Kells.
A study of these artists and the various styles that have been developed over the past 40 years could modernize type illustration and type design in mainstream graphic design.
Understanding and authentically incorporating these new ideas and techniques into our traditional ideas of graphic design would at least delight audiences with something new.
For many designers like myself, graphic design was the culturally and economically safe way to be creative for a career.
The majority of the work we studied in school was smart, challenging, bold, and exciting, but it was also almost invariably tied to a product or a war.
Graphic design was a way to communicate your client’s message, and that message was to buy a product or service.
Design does not challenge the system; it is the language of the system.
An inclusion of graffiti into our studies could show us an entire ecosystem of artists, styles, tools, and techniques that have no interest in commercial matters, is intended to rock the boat, is inherently political, and shows what we could also be doing as graphic designers.
It is at best a mistake to dismiss graffiti as not worthy of study; it is arrogance to think it has nothing to offer because we don’t understand it; it is something worse to choose to ignore it once we know who the artists are the incredible skills they have.
Graffiti is an American invention that should be celebrated like hip-hop, jazz, or abstract expressionism.
It has a compelling history and narrative that highlights the struggles of poor communities without a voice, and that only seems more and more relatable to a large audience as time passes.
An inclusion of graffiti into graphic design studies and practices could free designers to think about their work in new ways, to explore ideas that are not in service of capital, to  create work that might run counter to commercial interests, but that might speak for communities, that might push back against the system that graphic design has so come to rely on.
The Faults in Our Defaults
The blank page holds a special kind of sway over our imaginations.
As a young designer, I was terrified of the empty page.
I knew that other people had solved this, designers that I admired had filled their blank pages with beautiful and meaningful things.
Designers I had judged and dismissed as untalented had done this thing that now seemed impossible to me, they had started with the same blank space and expressed ideas, cleverly or roughly solved communication problems, they filled the blank page.
As I learned more about design, I learned that you don’t start with a blank page, you start with an idea, and from that idea, you can pull out all sorts of connections and pathways and solutions.
The blank page is not blank at all; it has been formed and shaped for a reason; the designer has picked it because it helps solve a problem.
As a new writer I know that the blank page is not a thing to be afraid of, that it is not empty, but I don’t have experience writing, so the blank page can feel like a dark room sometimes feels, I know it is not scary if I think about it, but it holds potential for something terrible.
For designers and writers alike having a place to start, a steady foothold, a path forward, some clear markers of some sort, that can make this journey feel safer, feel like we are not alone in a dark room with no idea about what we are supposed to be doing can ease the worry and nudge us forward.
Microsoft Word offers templates to start with; the writer fills in the blanks, and then you have something that is functionally usable.
Adobe InDesign provides a set of defaults when a designer starts a new project, but these starting points are misleading; the path provided is almost entirely in the wrong direction or at least is a confusing trail that crosses itself and leads you to a worse place than when you started.
From the shape of the page to basic paragraph formatting, InDesign offers senseless answers and obfuscates some critical questions in doing so.
The turn and tooth of a wood screw is a standardized and international norm .
Dutch insurers of ocean traveling ships wanted to make sure that the boats were being built to a high enough standard that the vessel would not be likely to sink and then that therefore they would not have to pay out for lost cargo and ships in case of sinking .
Making sure that all of the screws being used to build the boat were the same and met a certain quality created the need for an industrial standard.
The stories behind why the objects in the world look and act the way they do are often hard to trace and difficult to tell.
Graphic design exists inside of an invisible and blurry boundary of various industrial standards.
When designing for print, how the object is meant to be used, the production process of the thing and the delivery method all create a defined edge to what the designer can create.
These boundaries do not determine what the final thing should look like, but they do set the limits that need to be worked within.
If the item being made is a book full of words then the shape of the pages can’t be so tall that the book falls over itself, it can’t be so small that the readers fingers and thumbs don’t have a place to hold onto without obscuring the words, it can’t be so large that it won’t fit on a large press sheet at the printers.
While the content of the project will be the primary focus of the page, the designer must also consider press sheet sizes, paper grain direction, the final weight of the object, if it can fit inside of a standard envelope, and a series of other industrial standards that give boundary to the designed thing.
When faced with a blank page, I know that there are some invisible rules to follow, that repetition has created norms, that in the West I can safely place the start of my words near the top left corner of the page and that it will be understood by an audience to be the beginning.
It is difficult to not start there with most of our tools and software.
Starting a page at the bottom left of a page in Microsoft Word and working back would be hard, typing a letter on a typewriter, in the same manner, would be almost impossible.
These standards are built into the tools we use to create things.
Graphic designers don’t often work with a text editing software or with a physical typewriter.
They instead use Adobe InDesign, a powerful production and design tool that is complex and allows the finest details of the design to be considered by the designer.
The designer can start a new project and define and control the hundreds of details that need to be considered in the making of a well-designed project.
Adobe InDesign is taught in design programs in colleges across the world; it has been the standard tool for design for the past 20 years; it is what serious professionals use.
Given its audience and intended users, you would assume that it’s suggested defaults when starting a new project would be a safe place to begin.
When a new project is started, the designer is met with a new document menu with loads of options, and by default, they are filled in with what you might think would be a thoughtful page in mind.
But the defaults that are suggested are so poorly considered you might think that the engineers who built this software don’t actually know anything about design, or that they are playing a joke of some sort.
The suggested default is a letter-sized page, with half-inch margins around the entire page, and facing pages.
While some designers have to work inside of the limits of a desktop printer and make work that is produced on 8.5” x 11” sheet of paper, most designers hardly ever work inside of those constraints, they create page shapes that help tell of the story of the project, that can be cropped out of a press sheet in almost any way they want, that can have images and color that bleed off of the page that can be cut into.
This default of a letter-sized page makes me question if the engineers at Adobe really understand their user base and audience.
The margins on a well-designed page make reference to the object as a whole.
The Guttenberg bible has margins that repeat the ratios present on the page to create what is considered a harmonious whole.
The shape of the page and the shape of the text block on that page can repeat each other to create a repetitive harmony, or they can contrast each other to tell a story and create tension.
The relationship between what is the margin and what is not, that relationship can express an idea, it can affect legibility, it can make a book feel cold and indifferent, or it can make the reading feel breezy and effortless.
The margins the InDesign gives as a standard default are half-inch margins all around the page.
This has no relationship to the shape of the page or its proportions, it has no historical precedent or meaning, it is just there, and if you don’t know any better than you might think that is a good and thoughtful margin and hit the okay button and start your new project with a page shape and margins that have nothing to do with the content you are working with and no historical or logical reasons.
Microsoft Word has more considered margins by default in its templates.
There are lots of different ways to shape a page and determine margins and measures.
The measure is graphic design jargon for line length.
One method is to determine the type size of the main body copy that will fill up most of the page and where the reader will spend most of their time and then determine the ideal length of a line of text, with that length known you can subtract it from the page width and what you have leftover creates your horizontal margins.
The other method is essentially the same process but reversed; you create your margins as a function of the ratio of the shape of the page, and whatever is not margin space is the text block space.
Classical Western typography for extended texts says that 66 characters per line are ideal, and between 45 and 75 are in the range of acceptable.
Once you know what your line length is going to be, you can do some simple math to determine how large your type needs to be to result in a 66 character line.
The defaults that InDesign uses create such long line lengths that to achieve an ideal 66-character line your body copy would need to be set at 18pt and would look absurd.
There is an inverse relationship between a page’s margins and measure; as one increases, the other decreases.
Once that relationship is figured out you can solve for your type height for an ideal measure length.
The line length (measured in points) divided by 30 equals “x” where “x” is type height in points.
A lot of designers don’t enjoy math very much and are frustrated by this kind of system, but that frustration does not make it less useful.
InDesign sets the default type size to 12pt, which creates lines with, on average 100 characters (which is well outside of the typographically acceptable range.)
Typography that obscures the text by creating difficult to read text is common and can be found in “the fine print” of legal documents.
The content is there, but not to be read, but the line lengths are large, the type is small, and the leading is tight, all of that makes for difficult to parse text.
A long line length can still work in a layout if the leading is generous.
If the long lines have enough room between and around them, they can still be legible and help in the ease of reading.
A leading of about 18pts for 12pt type can work without hurting legibility.
InDesign’s defaults do not care about use or function; they just exist and look roughly good enough.
InDesign sets a default of 120% of text height as the default leading, it does not matter how long the measures are, 10pt text is set over 12pt leading even if the measures are long.
That default leading creates a difficult to read page.
The baseline grid can be a valuable way to align lots of text blocks on a single page or throughout a long document.
If employed, it overwrites the leading a designer has set for their text and forces everything to a new leading that creates the baseline grid.
Text set in columns that don’t use the baseline can feel sloppy when the lines of text in each column don’t align along the baseline, it is a subtle thing, but it helps to create a sense of unity in the text and on the page.
The text size default that InDesign creates is 12pt type set over 14.4pt leading, so the baseline grid default should match this 14.4pt leading.
It does not.
It is set at 12pt.
This default, if used, would force your page to have very tight leading and have very long line lengths, this would make for challenging text to read.
While there is no hard and fast rule about what a perfect rag for left aligned text is, most typographers would not use hyphenation in text set that way.
Hyphens should be used with justified text to help prevent strange gaps in your text that can be distracting for a reader, but text set left aligned, and rag right does not need hyphenation.
InDesign’s default text block is rag right with hyphenation turned on for the paragraphs.
In the Design of Everyday Things, Don Norman says if you don’t know how to use a tool properly, it is designed badly .
We expect that as we go through a day using things, making a coffee, opening a door, using the suggested defaults in some software, that the recommendations are pointing us in a good direction, that we are being helped, and that it would be better to use the suggested default instead of blindly guessing at what we are doing.
My coffee machine suggests that for six units of water, I add four of the provided scoops full of ground coffee.
I assume that this will make a reasonable cup of coffee, I assume that the provided scoop is the correct size, I assume that the units of measure for the water are useful in some manner.
Using the defaults in InDesign will create a poorly designed page that somehow manages to get at least some aspects of typography and design wrong.
The feeling that I have of something that is very much like fear when looking at a blank page, the stress of being unprepared to start but knowing that I do have to start, the knowledge that what makes the blank page awful is just me and my lack of something, and I can’t figure out what, this is what pushes me to do almost anything else in the world other than write.
I know that starting with a blank page is not the place to start, the page shape itself is part of the communication, a DIN ISO shaped page has meaning, a page set in the golden section ratio has meaning, and this meaning affects the design whether you understand it or not.
From the pages shape and the ratio that page is built on, you have all of the information you need to create thoughtful margins, measures, type sizes, and leading.
The blank page is blank, but it is not empty of information.
InDesign could suggest much more thoughtful defaults, but as they exist now, new designers would be better served if InDesign had no recommended defaults, and in fact, asked the designer to consider all of these settings.
Instead, designers are given bad answers to questions they did not know they were being asked.
?
The Shape of Text
On the bookshelf, there are a very select handful of books that have made it through the various purges that proceed each move we make across the continent.
The books, no longer needed for the academic research for which most of them were initially purchased, are now arranged by the color of the spine.
They are the few that have made impacts enough that we know every part of them, we know them by name, idea, author, height, width, and color.
The shelf is a chromatic mountain range; one color moves into the next as the heights and widths grow and dip in erratic waves and troughs.
Almost all of the books have their own specific shape in the mountain; some Little Brown, Broadview, and Penguin Classics create short breaks of regularity with small collections of a particular author or topic, but for the majority of its run there is no pattern or plan visible.
This topography is meaningful, but not obvious, the taller thinner books are not better or more valuable than the thin squatter volumes, the meanings are specific to the individual books.
What seems like it might be merely a container for the actually important thing, a glossy packaging around the possibly profound words, is, in fact, part of the text, it is a part of the story.
The volume, height, width, and depth they all are part of the whole, they are all decisions and choices made by a designer, a designer ideally who was thinking very hard about how to help the authors words be read, or felt, or understood.
Every shelf full of books in the world, in its millions of various topographies, tells a small story about the effort and care that has shaped each of those volumes.
The words are not all of a story, the almost invisible details that surround and hold those words are ideas that can add meaning and nuance, that can add an entire extra story for the reader to discover and experience, they are part of the conversation the reader has with the words, a part of the whole.
Printers, publishers, book designers, and typographers have had hundreds of years to refine, explore, and experiment with printed pages.
They have created beautiful solutions, developed standards of production, defined entire languages, and created new ways of measuring the world.
The systems that were developed can be wildly complicated, maddeningly vague, poorly documented, and often all three.
Still, designers use the tools and ideas daily to reproduce what has worked for centuries or to think of new ways to explore the relationship between the words and the pages.
The change from analog to digital was so fast and so total that the design industry was caught entirely off guard, but then so was almost everyone.
Typefaces that once pushed ink into the page alongside photographs exposed with chemicals, silver and light; both were no longer physical objects that existed in space; they became near-weightless bits of data, traveling around the world without physical boundaries.
Very little went on unchanged by this digitization, and everyone needed to rethink how the world worked.
But hundreds of years of repetition, of following the same rules and paths again and again, creates very stubborn ideas and rules.
They can be so deeply embedded as to begin to feel like they have always been and that they can never change, and in an attempt to hold on to them, we try and apply what has always been on to the new thing, and always with limited success.
This new space was so different that the engineers acting as early explorers mapped what they saw and invented with the names and ideas that they knew.
Text would, as it always had, live on pages.
The words would have structure enough to stand, but just barely.
The engineers not knowing any better thought that the words were all that there was, that the text itself was the entire story and that if it could live without it, then it was not necessary, but being just alive and living are very different things.
In an attempt to bring something beyond what the engineers who had built the internet had considered, designers started to apply the knowledge they had about text to this new space.
As with early explorers in almost all of history, they got most everything wrong.
Designers are starting to see this new space not as an analog to the printed page they know, but as something or somewhere free of constraints, with no rules so deeply practiced, no idea so deeply held that they will run afoul of those who defend those rules for the printed page.
The shape of printed pages, based in the hidden and sacred geometry and thinking about music scales by lunatics like Newton seeking divine structures in everything they could measure, see and create, are fundamental to how much of the history of book design and typography developed.
Chapter 8 of Bringhurst’s Elements of Typographic Style, Le Corbusier’s The Modular, and Tschichold’s The Form of the Book, each of them canonical, all are deeply concerned about our moral failings as proven by our lack of understanding and misuse of the page and its shape.
The ratios that define the shapes of pages are an incredibly valuable relationship.
With it, a designer can create complex systems of relations between every element that might be included on the page.
The margins, measure, type size and scale, the placement of folios, all of these parts, their location, and size can be determined by simple calculations that relate to the shape of the page.
It is complicated, and it can be ignored for very good reasons or for the reason of not knowing that it was even possible.
Given that is complex and that very few people will know if you have considered it while developing your pages, many designers have claimed it as inconsequential, old fashioned, or showing off, as ways to excuse their lack of knowledge on the subject.
The transmission of text as data to various locations and devices has exploded what the shape of the page is, it has created an opportunity to rethink, to invent, to imagine something new.
What shape is a book if it can be read on a phone, or a tablet, or on a watch face? The geometry of beautiful pages based on ideas like the Van DeGraff cannon, which could create complex and harmonious spreads for text, became as irrelevant as the idea of the back of a page.
The new text has no use for spreads.
It is not bound by or made more of by the shape of a page.
Digital typography has, for the most part, addressed this new and changing space by attempting to force old ideas about structure onto an amorphous cloud, and it has failed.
The words are left to float in arbitrary areas that at most don’t hurt the ideas, but hardly ever add anything of value.
The commercial interests of publishing often override the work of the designers when shaping a page.
The well-considered margins that create easily read text in easy to parse measures with space for that text and the reader’s eye to rest are seen by the publisher as empty and therefore wasted space.
With the cost per page no longer a consideration in this shapeless digital void of data, the designer can experiment with line length, scale, and margins.
Freedom from the physical makes space an unlimited resource.
The accepted ideas and equations about the relationship between height and width and their impacts on the structure of design breakdown when those measurements become infinite.
The margins of beautifully designed books can help reinforce an idea or even tell an entire chapter of the book by themselves.
In Where The Wild Things Are by Maurice Sendak, a famous children’s book published in 1963 and likely read millions of times, a subtle shifting of the margins of the book throughout express an entirely new idea that is not touched in the words of the text.
The margins begin very large and shrink and shift as the book progresses until a full 3 spreads with full bleeds.
The margins gently move back, taking back more of the page until the end of the book, but the margins never go back to how they started.
If asked, most readers of this book would likely not recognize this journey being told by the margins, but it makes the story more than the words and drawings, even if you don’t think you have seen it.
Playing in and with a space that is so common that it is usually not even seen can subtly nudge a reader; it can make them just slightly aware that something is not quite right, that something that they can’t pinpoint has changed.
The designer in the English translation of 1Q84 by Haruki Murakami makes the text just a little more uncanny by creating a subtle shift in the margins of the facing pages and by creating movement on the location of the folios.
The pages, as they pass between your finger, as you turn each one and find your place in the top left of the new page, connecting the thoughts across the space, a reader can physically feel themselves moving through the space of the story.
The weight and volume of the book and your place in its pages give hints about what is to come.
There is an added anxiousness that can be felt as you approach the physical end of a text, unsure how the author will be able to finish all of what needs to be done in the pages they have left.
The formless and pageless space of data is not bound in this manner.
Forcing an imitation of the physical page space, or an infinite scrolling of potentially unlimited text are the current understandings of how to best use text in this space.
The lack of real weight, the loss of the ability to feel where you are in a text by touch, the visual and material passage through reading are lost.
Visible milestones; added data to show you where you are in the text via a progress bar help to find your bearings but feel hollow to as a solution.
A new measure of text and something that feels possibly native and original to the space is not placing a point in space to mark, but a place in time.
Sites like Medium show a reader a title, the author’s name, publication date, and the estimated time expected for a reader to get through the text.
The text, no longer tethered to physical pages becomes weightless, but having a beginning and an end, they can be given a structure by time.
While margins can successfully define the outer edges of simple prose on their own, complex texts can be helped by more intricate structures to guide the reader, to organize ideas, to clarify what is unclear.
The internal area of the page bound by margins can further be divided.
The pages interior sliced by horizontal and vertical lines that define precise units of internal organization that create a grid of lines to align the content with have been a technique of print designers for hundreds of years.
The modern obsession with clarity and organization celebrated the Swiss International style grid system as defined by Josef Muller-Brockmann, and others make the grid system central to its work and ideas.
The ability to organize, control, and use content with such precision and with a system that claimed to be universal and culturally agnostic became an enormous influence in almost all current design.
The clumsy structures that described the engineer’s early attempts at organizing the content of the new digital spaces became more and more refined and detailed as expectations about the economic possibilities of it grew.
As the design industry began to pay more attention to the needs of this space, designers started again to map concepts developed over centuries about the printed page to this digital environment.
Interest in organizing massive amounts of complex, varied, and often undefined content led to the rediscovery by digital designers of grid systems.
The attempted mapping of this concept invented and refined over decades for use in print onto the digital world of the internet, with all of its very different tools and interactions, has made a thing that seems on the surface to help, but the structures it builds are based on no foundations and under the weight of use will collapse and have wasted a lot of time and energy.
The grids that are being created have nothing to do with the shape of the space, they create no harmony, no underlying structure that can add anything but the most basic of organization.
Grids by themselves are not capable of building harmonious relationships, they need context, they need edges and ratios to relate to.
The pages that grids were refined on were over time were constant, each new project could be a different shape, but the shape maintained.
The grid system did not anticipate variation.
The printed page was static, the edges and borders never shifted, but the digital environment is various, it is liquid and borderless, the tools and ideas of one are mostly irrelevant to the other.
Marking difference with color, space, value, hue, luminosity, in almost any way, is how we create hierarchies.
We contrast some definable aspect of a thing with another, we assign value to those aspects, and we mark a difference.
These marks define and organize, they guide a reader through a text, they clarifying the relationships between elements of the content.
Type designers have applied various subtle markers to the alphabet, and typographers have assigned meanings to the differences created by these contrasts.
Words created with all capitalized letters contrast with another word made of all lowercase, thick bolder letters contrast with the thin, creating a difference that can be employed to convey meaning to the reader.
The physical and economic constraints of printed works have limited the range of ways to create the differences needed to build hierarchical systems.
Typeface case, letterform slope, weight, scale, and space have been the traditional methods used.
In the economic interest of fitting as much text as possible onto a page, scale and space have been used only in small amounts as those paying for the production of the text often see empty space as waste and something to be filled.
Another cost-based limitation that designers often work inside of is the range of available colors.
Printing in one color is traditional for many printed texts, the use of color to convey information about hierarchy is uncommon and costly.
With the freedom from the physical and the limitations of page counts, with displays they can generate orders of magnitude more colors than human eyes can see, potential new ways of considering hierarchies for this new space exist.
A Pinot Noir, a Merlot, a Shiraz, or a Malbec are all incredibly different on the palate, or so I am told.
Beyond the categories of red, white, dessert, and organic, the subtle and possibly very important differences in the classifications and types of wine are outside of my understanding and outside of my personal and professional interests.
I believe that I will be able to happily move through my entire life, not knowing any more about wine than I do at this very moment.
Typefaces are very similar to wine in this regard.
Most people, I believe, understand type as I understand wine.
San Serif, Serif, Comic Sans, and Papyrus; beyond that level of identification, no one really cares or can tell the difference.
This does not mean that typeface selection is not important and valuable, but that just like margins or page-shape, they are a subtle communication that can help clarify a text.
Just as a considered wine pairing by a talented sommelier might add levels of complexity and unexpected nuance to a meal, a well-considered font selection can add to the enjoyment or clarity or sense of tension or any number of other things to a text.
Typeface selection and use are often a significant aspect of a printed text.
Ensuring that the font family has enough built-in variation to support the texts hierarchy needs, considering if the typeface is structurally, culturally, historically, aesthetically appropriate to the content or themes of the text to be set, these aspects are ideally considered by the typographer and inform one of the major choices made in the design of the text.
The engineers of the early internet made a choice based on an understanding of type and design that is similar to my knowledge of wine, they decided that thirteen typefaces were all that they would need to convey all of the information.
Tablet manufacturers like Kindle support six fonts, every book available on a Kindle tablet has one of six typefaces, the same margins, the same leading, and the same type size.
The digital space for all of its possibility has been disastrous when it came to type.
The type design industry was slow to understand this new space, they as with most of the design world, attempted to map the old onto the new.
The last few years have seen new ideas developed for the new space in the type industry, a type that is as fluid as the space itself, that can adapt with use and space.
While page shapes, margins, grids, hierarchies, fonts can add clarity and additional meaning to a printed text, the format and style of the publication is often overlooked as a thing that can be read, a place full of meaning in itself.
Eleven picas is a typical line length for a newspaper column; almost no one in the world knows that, but its narrowness has come to mean something specific; it contains in it a feeling of importance, of fleeting nowness, both ephemeral and meaningful.
Printed texts in all of there various types and genres have made impressions on our culture.
The shape and size of the pages, the way it folds, the volume of columns, the tightly set text, without reading a word on the page of a newspaper its function is understood.
The nutritional information on a package, a US tax form, a note left under a windshield, the format, and structures of these can be read and understood.
This cultural shorthand, these shared understandings allow us to navigate our lives and to make choices.
Handed an essay to read, before even the title is considered, the author must overcome or relax in the assumptions that come along with the form of its publication.
Before the first sentence is seen, the materials of the publication will undermine or bolster the ideas of the writer.
The double spaced twelve-point default text, the lack of considered hierarchy, Microsoft’s default margins, the editable Word doc submitted for review, not for reading, but seeking feedback, asking to be graded.
The MLA requirements that burden a student are a neon sign flashing to the reader that this is not serious, this is seeking feedback on structure, this is a draft at best and a hoop that both the writer and the reader know must be passed through due to a requirement in a syllabus at worst.
The impact on the reader based on the format alone undermines the arguments put forward.
In 1998 medical journal The Lancet was redesigned by Robert Waller.
One of the communication problems Waller needed to solve was the introduction of non-peer-reviewed articles into the journal for the first time.
The Lancet’s editors wanted to make sure that readers could easily differentiate between the types of content.
Waller found that the two-column layout was clearly associated with peer-reviewed journals, so they set the new types of content in three columns.
The addition of a column was enough to signal to the readers that the type of content had changed and that a different style of reading was needed.
On March 6, 2005, The New York Times ran an article titled “One Part Mr.
Peanut, One Part Hipster Chic” in Section E, Page 12.
It was 600 words long and was a joke.
It was what is often referred to as a “filler” story, it filled in a couple of empty inches on page 12 of section E.
The format of these texts added information for the reader, they prepared them for the kind of information they would be engaging with.
The format, the columns, the length, or the placement on the page, these subtle structures contain cultural information to be read.
Stripped of this context and these ques texts become flat and meaning unclear.
The New York Times received a lot of criticism about the monocle story, many readers were not getting the joke.
These complaints came from an audience that had not seen the print version of the story but had read the digital publication on the paper’s website or app.
With the freedoms that digital publishing provides, the freedom from limitations like space allowed every story to have its own dedicated area, its own giant headline, its own photograph.
With everything elevated to the same height, all of the complex nuance and shared cultural understandings about space and layout are lost.
A short comedic article about monocle culture is given the same treatment as an article about the climate crisis, or 7 Nutritional Deficiencies of an Ex-Vegan.
Designers, writers, and readers have not decided on the new shorthand’s, the new meanings of structures, the new hierarchies of texts.
The miniature mountain range on our bookshelf left undisturbed is as still as any real mountain.
The words written, the inks printed, the paper trimmed and bound, all of the action of this making was at the start.
A writer, designer, and publisher made choices about structure, about theme, about how the reader would engage with the text.
The margins once set do not change, the text size, the font, these are all forever.
The digital space makes each text an ocean; it has no edges, no shape.
Each ocean poured into any container, editable, and amorphous.
The digital publishing space is still very new.
We have not caught up to the changes, they happen faster than we can understand.
We will need some time to appreciate the subtleties, to find the meaning in the structures and details.
?
Abandoned essay about how much I don’t like graphic design.
This is an essay I started to write about how graphic designers are boring, dumb, and sometimes a little cruel.
I stopped writing it when I realized that I was being boring, dumb, and a little cruel.
I am not proud of how long It took me to notice what I was doing.
So what follows is a rambling mean spirited rant about graphic designers being petty written by a graphic designer being petty.
I can’t be friends with a person who will not admit to me that their job is stupid.
As a graphic designer working at various private fine arts and liberal arts colleges in America the people I meet don’t tend to be structural engineers or pediatric surgeons or things of that nature (I actually think those jobs are valuable and not stupid), they are often other designers, or editors, or writers, or type designers or other sorts of “creatives.” I am awful at parties partially because I can’t let this go (I am sure that I am generally not a great party guest for lots of other reasons also).
If I am talking to a type designer about their work, I press for them to admit it is stupid or without consequence, that it probably helps no one, that it is possibly incredibly important to themselves, but to almost no one else.
I think that this is the case, that I am forever seeking this out from people because I work in graphic design, and I very often do not like it, at my worst I hate it and think it hurts the world, on good days I think it can at least be fun.
But designers that take this work seriously, that wrap their personal identities up in the job, that can’t look honestly at it and laugh a little at the silly parts, they are the most tedious people you will ever meet.
“Most smart people avoid advertising, because most advertising avoids smart people”.
In an ad published in Time magazine in 1960 written by Bob Levenson this claim was put forward.
He said that we lived in a nation of smart people and that as clever as we creatives thought we were, that we were only fooling ourselves; not the audience.
For years I thought about Levenson’s statement.
I tried to hold it in my mind when I worked with clients trying to sell some absurd service or product.
I wanted to give them a solution that was challenging, clever, funny, engaging, smart.
I think the 60 years since he wrote that has proven that Levenson was wrong.
We are mostly idiots.
On both sides of the page or screen, we are happy with easy ideas, we are happy to be comfortable, we are happy to not be challenged in our assumptions.
While I don’t think a lot of designers would accept the idea because it would run counter to how they see themselves in the world, but I think that our history, our teaching, our celebrated stars of design, all point to the fact that design is very conservative.
Designers often want to be thought of as something like an artist, a creative mind challenging the dominant narrative and breaking the rules, but graphic design is constrained and made a coward by the economic system it exists in.
Capitalism trumps brave new ideas.
The need to pay rent, to make pay role, to find and keep clients warps how we see our role in the world, it keeps us risk averse, it rewards sameness, it rocks no boats.
We become a monoculture of ideas and aesthetics.
The popularity of geometric sans serifs for massive internet companies is celebrated as in fact smart and bold and not derivative and lazy.
We celebrate the use of historical aesthetic models absent of content and cultural value.
Design teaches from a monoculture of history, critiques with conservative structures for measuring quality, and celebrates a very narrow idea of successful work.
Given how little has changed in our industry, I believe it that we in fact want a monoculture, we want sameness, we want simple solutions to complex ideas.
Our intellectual, cultural, and aesthetical monoculture, our conservativeness born out of something like laziness, and our reliance on our client’s money have made the function of much of our work to be effectively window dressing.
Much of the work that is produced is a sort of cultural filler, like pea protein added to my dog’s food to make up for the removal of grain, it fills a space that needs to be filled.
We make what is expected of us and we don’t make anything to complex or clever.
I have spent an incredible amount of time making materials for poorly considered projects.
Posters, pamphlets, mailers and other objects that it has been decided—without any interrogation of the value these will have, without any thought about the impact of the thing—should be made for a project.
No problem is solved, no problem is even identified, no thought other than the need for a thing has been considered.
So we polish poop, we create new materials for bad ideas, we ignore the bad, we let bad design by our celebrities slide or even celebrate it as good.
According to our cultural critics the 2008 election of Barak Obama was due in some part to the great logo and identity design, just like the election of Hillary Clinton was due to the great H logo.
Just kidding, the failure of that campaign had nothing to do with the identity.
We only count successes.
The fact that the icon had an arrow pointing the right and that that might mean something in a political context was either ignored or intentional.
In the 2004 documentary The Persuaders a man taking part in a market research survey is asked if eating bread makes him feel lonely.
He responds “Do you find a lot of people saying yes to that?” I think about that interaction a lot.
The absurdity of the question that probably seemed important and smart in the meeting where they decided on the questions to be asked.
The tragic honesty of an idiot putting forward a terrible idea and the group of people who all for reasons that probably range from impostor syndrome to indifference to shared stupidity agreed that it was a good question and should make the final cut.
It reminds me to not take myself or my work to seriously.
Branding, taken to the extreme lengths that we saw in the 2000’s made marketing and graphic design look foolish, arrogant, and short-sighted.
In 2009 Miracle Whip salad dressing created an entire campaign of tv and print ads attempting to make themselves a lifestyle brand, they tried to make a mayonnaise alternative edgy and “punk”.
People wasted so much time and effort making these ridiculous ads that were rightly mocked and ridiculed as absurd.
For many years graphic designers talked about brands and branding with a seriousness that was embarrassing.
Brand managers and brand consultants became a subgenre of graphic design filled with a kind of arrogance that only comes from those too stupid to know that they are in fact stupid.
In December of 2008 I was called into a private meeting with the owner and principal of the studio I was working at as the art director.
I was told that the studio would be shutting down for a few months because we had been so heavily affected by the economic downturn.
I said I was sad to hear that and wished him well (we both had young children at home and the loss of income would be hard for us both).
The following day we were told that in fact we would not be closing down, but that that had been a “loyalty test” and that I and the creative director had failed it and were fired.
It was cartoonish in its pettiness and mean-spirited nature.
James Faulkner was a mean idiot without talent, but he is hardly unique in the design world.
In a very competitive industry with fewer jobs than there are people to fill them, worker exploitation is common.
Low pay, no overtime, no benefits, no vacation, and no contract are common workplace scenarios.
Needing to speak to these people for any reason is frustrating and a little bit soul sucking (working for them will kill you slowly and if at all possible you should quit your job if you can), but our industry puts up with them and that says as much about us as it does about them.
Maybe more.
Marian Bantjes said we should strive to delight the audience.
The thing we do, the work we make hardly ever makes the kind of impact our industry claims, so Bantjes said you can at least try and delight them.
The Case for Deeper Readings of the Arts and Crafts Writings and Theories
The Arts and Crafts movement is the beginning of our modern understanding of graphic design prac-tice and theory.
The theoretical underpinning of so much of how we think about and talk about mate-rials, the relationships of elements (interior and exterior), the choices that designers make to solve communication problems, everything that we consider, every choice me make is trying to solve the questions of fitness of purpose and the relevance and value of our choice of materials to solving our design problems.
The very modern ideas of design systems are modern retellings of Emery Walker’s harmonies on new and different scales, but at the core still very much asking the same questions and trying to work inside of a set of ideals set forth by Ruskin, Morris, and others.
Meggs’ says it as well as anyone else when describing the ideas of Williams Morris.
He writes that he “called for a fitness of purpose, truth to the nature of materials and methods of production, and indi-vidual expression by both designer and worker.”  I have not been able to find a primary source for these words, but as a theme, something like them is repeated very often when talking about Morris.
As an example The Red House project created by Philip Webb and William Morris was designed to be useful, to create a house that did not gain its shape and structure from contextless historical models, but that was built with the people living in the home in mind, with the purpose of the space determining what it would look like and built to its function.
Each element of the design, each piece of furniture, each wall decoration, they all attempted to be in harmony with the other, the totality of the home and the single teaspoon were related.

The words shift, the languages change, the contexts are new, but the base of which the theories build, the ideas of shared purpose of elements, of truth to materials, of relationships of parts to one another working toward a greater whole, these are the fundamental themes that the Arts and Crafts movement express and practiced.
A traceable narrative or story of these ideas, and this philosophy begins on November 15, 1888.
Emery Walker gives a presentation titled “Letterpress, Printing and Illustration”  at the New Gallery, where he called for elements of the page to “to harmonize with the printed page regarded as a whole.”  According to Williams Morris’s daughter, he said that this talk, which he attended with Walter Crane, inspired him towards book design as a project .
The German concept of gesamtkunstwerk, a theory that calls for considering the overall of the thing being made, had been in use as a literary and musical idea for some time before this, but was introduced as a concept in architecture in 1895 in the Villa Bloemenwerf in Uccle in Belgium designed by Henry van de Velde, “his designs embracing all aspects of the project, even to the extent of clothing for his wife.”  Similarly, Frank Lloyd Wright in 1908 wrote about “organic architecture” , which he later described in a 1958 tv interview as “Organic means, in a philosophic sense, entity.
Where the whole is to the part, and the part is to the whole.
Where the nature of the materials, the nature of the purpose, the nature of the entire performance becomes a necessity, and out of that comes what significance you can give the building as a creative artist.”  These ideas are repeated and repeated throughout our modern history, they are seen in the Bauhaus , the Deutscher Werkbund , and in the Modern design movements .
The ideals and philosophies of the Arts and Crafts have become so fundamental to modern graphic design that they are hard to see.
They have become so ingrained into each step of the evolution of graphic design over the past century that almost all of the studied movements in that history refer to something that owes its inclusion to the Arts and Crafts.
The concepts, flexible enough to be mapped onto the numerous changes that have occurred in the past 120 years, reappear with slight variations, but never too far off and never in opposition.
They create a resilient system.
But terms like “fitness” and “truth,” repeated and restated, are not so simply understood; their meaning is dependent on con-text.
They can become suspect, or at least worth debating when the original source of these words and ideas also say things like “Since the race of man began its course of sin on this earth, nothing has ever been done by it so significative of all bestial, and lower than bestial degradation, as the acts of the Indian race” said by John Ruskin , or “Japanese-like spirit of deviltry and the grotesque,” said by Walter Crane .
I think that the ideas of the Arts and Crafts movement are enormously important to our understanding of how we see and define the borders and edges of graphic design, how we think about the work and theories we create, and how we educate new designers.
Still, I also believe that is should be scrutinized and read deeply, and thought about with the intensity that academic research requires.
When we consider other writings of the time, we bring a critical lens through which to think about and consider the impacts and meaning of the words.
When we read Emily Dickenson, the words are each pondered, each phrase is considered and written about and debated.
Our understanding of Dickenson is vastly improved by the deep reading, and our understanding of the wider world in almost every respect is more nuanced.
The Bram Stoker novel Dracula has been read and reread numerous times with different theories through which to try and understand it, its impacts, and its effects on culture.
These deep-readings scrutinize every aspect of the novel, the specific words used and omitted, the choice of place, charac-ter, and action.
Stoker, a writer contemporary to Ruskin, Morris, Walker etc.
and his novel have be-come somewhat iconic as a tool to describe the culture of late Victorian England , and that England is one “obsessed with the preservation of a pure, homogenous, and unchanging identity increasingly under siege from subversive elements.”  I am bringing up Stoker and Dracula as an example to add context to the cultural feelings of the time and place, and also to point out that the ideas and themes of the novel are not left unchallenged, undiscussed, or ignored, that they have been considered again and again and has been made more compelling and important by it.
The pure homogenous and unchanging ideal England, the nostalgic longing for a history that never re-ally existed, the celebration of the fantastic beauty of a magical time that was only ever stories, these are stories being told by the Kelmscott Press, by Ruskin, by Morris, by Crane.
They express a longing for a past that never was, populated by a homogenous people that never were.
No one and no group will ever be perfect, be without misstep, without blind spots, without the limits of the cultural moment in which they live or lived.
While William Morris’s thoughts on British rule of India are racist and insulting generally , they are mild when compared to Ruskin’s overt and very pub-lic bigotry towards the people of India.
Walter Crane’s casual racism towards the Japanese is similar to the Orientalist views of Morris; racist, demeaning, dismissive, and insulting.
The combination of the shared Orientalism, Ruskin’s more overt racism, the nostalgic Disneyfied and idealized depictions of British history, and the late Victorian cultural of racial “anxiety” and fear of the “other” in an Empire in decline, all point to a flawed thinking about the world that we as modern de-signers and design academics should consider.
When Heidegger’s notebooks were published, his anti-Semitism, and having had been an actual member of the Nazi party could not be dismissed any longer.
It caused Heideggerian academics to reconsider him and his theories .
The Arts and Crafts movement are not Nazi’s, they are not little British Heidegger’s, but they are racists, and I don’t think we have talked about it enough as a community.
We have not discussed what it means to our theories and his-tories that these men writing about “truth” and “fitness of purpose” might have meant something very different then we have traditionally thought, and we have not traditionally thought much about it at all.
We will learn more about the Arts & Crafts movement, we will find new meaning in the words, new ideas in the phrases and collections of works, we will read the Red House as text that could have impacts on how we think and work today.
We will learn more about ourselves, and we
will be better for it.
Like Heidegger, we can want them to not have been what they were.
To be “a Nazi in a different way than other people were Nazis,” as Heidegger’s admirers hoped for .
As we think through these issues, as we discuss the impacts of these designers and thinkers on our modern practice, we will have to de-cide if we can put aside these flaws because the ideas they developed are too fundamental and too important to the philosophy and practice of graphic design.
We can excuse bigotry because it was
common at the time, we can accept a closed-mindedness and narrowness of thought because of the shared culture of the Late Victorian era.
I can accept that that is true, that to judge someone from his-tory with the benefits of my cultural hindsight today is perhaps not fair.
But these men are lionized, they are celebrated in textbooks, they are respected, they are thought to be some of the greatest of us, some of the best makers and thinkers.
So, while I am fine to give the average English person of that era a pass on being, what I consider in my modern view, a bigot, I am not fine to let these men’s ideas continue to be shared without real interrogation.
A more in-depth look into the meaning of all of this might come to nothing; we might decide that these issues have no effect on the modern under-standing and thinking of graphic design, but not questioning these, I think, shows a lack of academic rigor in our thinking and philosophies.
 ?
Graphic Design in Times of Crisis
The clarity and impact of her words hit with the force of someone telling you something you don’t want to hear, almost like someone calling you out on a lie.
I feel sort of like a child that has disappointed my mom after having been caught doing something I knew was stupid or dangerous.
When Greta Thunberg addresses a room at the UN or Davos or anywhere, she speaks through all of the polished answers that we have been given to deflect her very right-eous anger.
The weak justifications for inactivity are exposed as just that.
I can’t be aloof or ironic and dismissive as I am when Bono or Bill Gates says something about helping a cause they support.
Seeing someone genuinely care, unafraid of the consequences that paralyze me, is arresting and shocking.
The simplicity and honesty of her message put into relief the complicated disingenuous stories we are told about our lives and the world we are in.
As a graphic designer, I have seen the kind of effort that goes into making something look “real” or un-designed, authentic.
When you know how the things are made you can see the details that tell you know that the handwritten note that says the heartbreaking or warming thing is fake —the handwritten note is, in fact, a typeset font, the lowercase “e” and “o” are the same in Love and hope, and the positive feel-ings I had for the thing are replaced by anger at the obvious manipulations—that the couple telling you about the benefits of a type of yogurt have been market researched to appeal to the group most likely to make a purchase.
Knowing that almost everything you see is a marketed experience intended to persuade you to make a decision makes you skeptical about the
motives of nearly everything you see.
So then coming face to face with such honesty as Thun-berg’s is almost unbearable.
 
The scale of the climate crisis is by all accounts awesome.
Its impacts are international, gener-ational, microscopic, continental, borderless in every way we can imagine.
In his 1991 book, We Have Never Been Modern, Bruno Latour uses what will soon become known as the climate cri-sis to demonstrate his idea of the Hybrid .
In describing the contents of a page of this daily newspaper, he recounts the details on an article that ranges in locations, times, ideas, he de-scribes something new, something nearly impossible to define, but that is obviously there, “The horizons, the stakes, the time frames, the actors — none of these is commensurable, yet there they are, caught up in the same story.” It affects every aspect of our lives, it is politics, science, faith, it is present in every conversation we have.
When we talk about having kids, what jobs we want, what we want to have for dinner, the climate crisis is right below the surface of them all.
In the book Operation Manual for Spaceship Earth, Buckminster Fuller suggests that the hyper-specialization of labor in the modern world has created a cognitive disconnect between our ac-tions and impacts, that the consequences of our actions are nearly impossible to comprehend2.
The long chain of events that our work as designers is a link in is hard to understand.
Doing the “right” thing is rarely as black and white as we hope.
Doing work for a company like AirBnb might seem simple and without much negative impact, but immediate impacts in a city like Chicago, where hotels works at the Congress Plaza Hotel were on strike for 10 years is put even more pressure on the striking workers to settle with management with worse outcomes, and the long term effects on towns and cities are now starting to be realized as they create shortages in rental properties in many areas.

In H.P.
Lovecraft stories, when faced with the enormity of the space monster, evil god, squid faced monsters power, the protagonists are driven insane.
The scale is so unbelievable as to be unbearable and paralyzing.
Faced now with a crisis that exists everywhere at all times, that is part of the creeping dread and anxiety that late-stage capitalism and the end of empires bring, it seems Lovecraft was wrong.
When faced with the unbearable we ignore it and continue on as if nothing really happened, we talk about the freshness of our CSA tomatoes, about getting the oil changed in our cars, about the mundane.
Or we panic.

In the article Our Mania for Hope is a Curse, Chris Hedges says “Only those who accept the very real possibility of dystopia, of the rise of a ruthless corporate totalitarianism, buttressed by the most terrifying security and surveillance apparatus in human history, are likely to carry out the self-sacrifice necessary for revolt.”  Hedges says that our hope stops us from the radical action necessary to combat what we face.
This sort of magical thinking allows us to believe that we will win this fight without sacrifice, without loss, without pain or suffering.
The fight against the climate crisis is most likely going to be lost, the sliver of time we have to make massive changes to almost all of modern life is ticking by, and we are doing nothing to halt its progress, in fact, we are making it worse faster.
While the natural world around us be-comes more hostile to human life, we can at least mitigate the worst possible outcomes by continuing to care for our communities, to help where we can, and to fight those who would seek to profit from further human suffering.
The fear that I have that the world that my family will live in will be hostile, that it will be the solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short kind that is the boogeyman of neo-liberal discourse, these hardships are already lived by huge numbers of people around the world.
And in these places people are not the cartoonish single dimensional brutes of corporate speculative fictions that we are told to expect as our society collapses.
Instead people live their lives, they make friends, they fall in love, they are happy and they are sad.
The knowledge that our individual ac-tions cannot impact this coming change, that impotence in the face of something so massive that it defies definition, that can stop us from all action.
Stopping is not the answer, but a change in prospective can help, your hard work and passion can’t stop global capitalisms de-struction of our future, but it can help in your immediate community.
You be of serve to those in need.
You can improve your local world; you can do go and try to do less unintended bad.
Design thinking and font choices are not going to stop this decline, but those tools and skills might be able to help in your community.

Greta Thunberg is inspiring.
Her speeches are arresting.
They are so outside of what we expect to hear, so far from what we have known in the last thirty years that they hit with a force that is hard to describe.
It is hard to crack the armor of cynicism and irony that many of us have de-veloped, hard to change decades of surety that the solutions to our personal problems (and all problems are personal in this model) is the purchase of another thing or service, hard to have faith in the honesty of someone who has access to the halls of power.
My initial instincts, jaded by time spent in the world, were depressingly simple.
I wanted to buy the coat she was wear-ing on her Atlantic crossing by boat.
When she was taking a boat across the ocean to address the UN on the climate crisis because of the negative environmental impacts of commercial flight, I saw this beautiful black sailing jacket with a nicely typeset wordmark and googled if it was for sale.
Others in the design industry tried and failed as I did to fully embrace her ideas.
One designer created a font from the letterforms on her sign , arguably missing the authentic-ity and value of this humble handmade sign, while another group of misdirected but well-intentioned designers in San Francisco painted a massive mural on of Thunberg’s head on a wall.
Design (and maybe Western culture generally) have become incapable of not trying to sell everything in sight.
Everything can either be sold or used as a tool to sell something else.
So much of our personal life has become a curated and designed presentation of a branded ver-sion of ourselves that even those that don’t work in a marketing heavy industry like design have adopted some of the language and skills for use in their everyday.
The need to sell a narrative about one’s life, to only reveal parts of ourselves after they have been polished and the edges smoothed down, to tell a story we want others to know about us, to buy into the shallow, harmful and boring idea of personal branding illustrates how pervasive and persuasive the tools of marketing have become.
The curated documentation of our lives to tell the story we want others to know it not limited to the obviously narcissistic Instagram and Facebook posts of fan-cy vacations, of fancy parties, of celebrity interactions, it is also to broadcast your righteous-ness, your #resistance, your disgust with the brash orange president.
Protests and marches have become another scenic view location to show your politicalness without having to do any hard work.
During the Occupy movement, Jay Z sold shirts through him Rocawear clothing line that read “Occupy All Streets,” with none of the proceeds donated to Occupy or anyone else.
During the Black Lives Matter protests, Pepsi ran a commercial depicting similar scenes to those shown on the nightly news for months, but in this case, the killing of young black men by the police is solved by Kendal Jenner giving the police a Pepsi .
Protests aimed at addressing the massive inequalities in our economic and justice systems become “edgy” locations and themes to sell products.
Our culture of selling has no limits and can never be shamed into doing the right thing.
Protests in North America are now a performance without a demand.
A million people meet and walk with signs and solidarity, but in the end, the point was only the walk; no demands made, no threat to further action.
The performance was the point.
The hard work of sustained political action is not valuable to us, or the consequences of that action are too severe.
The po-litical actions we see played out on the screens coming from France month after month might as well be another planet instead of another country.
In 1968 students in France shut down the government, in the US they burned buildings and occupied administrative offices in colleges across the country, they sacrificed for the hope of change.
While massive amounts of freshwater were being wasted in myriad industrial processes, we were told to make sure we turn off the tap while we are brushing our teeth, so we did not waste any water.
While fighting to hide the science about the impacts of manmade climate change, we were told that recycling our household waste was our duty as stewards of the Earth.
The problems were because of our own personal moral failings.
Capitalism could not be changed, it was a scorpion asking for a ride on our frog backs across the river if we are stung and die whose fault is it really? We knew what capitalism was when we started.

The scale of what needs to happen and the neo-liberal atomization of our lives make us give up before we start.
We are too late and, at the same time, sure that these same neo-liberal ideals will save us in time.
Graphic design was employed to communicate our various individual fail-ings as custodians of our environment.
Recycling programs, shorter showers, plastic bags — creative, smart, talented people developed campaigns, slogans, logos, info-graphics, websites, and every other form of communications to show us how we had failed but to have hope.
But also, to never look at the systems and industries that create real harm.
Design, as a tool in marketing, has become its primary focus.
A layer of grease in the engine, not making something new, in the end just making the machine run a little smoother.
We make the tools of our own demise work just a little bit better, we design the uniforms and let-terhead for police that tears children from parents, we sell things we know are bad for us and the environment, we participated blindly for decades, we now know the impacts.
Still, we show up to work on Monday.
But we could choose to do something else, we could be a wrench in that machine and not oil.
We would work to jam up the gears of our culture and try something new.
The sustained work and the intensity of the political action that our immediate future requires to avoid the very worst impacts of the climate crisis have been made to seem so radical that they are beyond imagination.
Instead, we look to giant tech companies like Google or Apple for solutions.
We look to a car salesman that also makes rockets for some reason for answers about how we save our future.
The futures of these billionaires we look to for solutions have almost nothing to do with most people’s prospects for a safe and healthy future.
That these forprofit companies will do what is needed, to sacrifice for us, to do anything other than dig-ging us deeper into a hole is magical thinking.
It is waiting for Superman to rescue us as we fall.
It is telling that Google no longer follows the motto “don’t be evil.”
The idea of the client has taken on such central importance in modern graphic design that it created a belief that without one, a graphic designer is nothing.
Without the darkness of the client, how would we see the brilliant light of the graphic designer? Without observation by the client, do we really even exist? Graphic design has moved so far into an acceptance that its on-ly value is to commercial interests that we ignore the lessons of our history, we ignore Hannah Hoch, we misunderstand John Heartfield, we forget the impact of Emory Douglas.
In the US, higher education is the only safe haven for graphic design to exist without the tether of the cli-ent or its money.
A model for a non-commercial graphic design profession is one of the great things that we can learn from academics, but that is often overlooked or dismissed and seen as a fantasy that only a rare few can have.
The professionalization of graphic design, or that the study and practice of graphic design is also the title of a particular job, has created a narrowed understanding of the work and ideas.
The ability to “make a living” from the proceeds of a graphic design practice as a measure of success tends to celebrate many of the wrong things and see failure in non-commercial exper-imentation.
Possibly the answer is to consider graphic design more closely to writing, or music or acting.
Kafka was a commercial failure in his life in that he did not publish his writing in his life, his work was not for sale or even for an audience.
Most musicians don’t write and play music for economic stability or the guarantee of fame, they do the work for other more per-sonal reasons.
Perhaps graphic design could learn from these disciplines and move away from an overly professional understanding of the work and celebrate small acts of creativity and craft.
A Joke About Typography and the Law (sort of)
I have a joke that I tell that mostly is to bug other graphic designers, it is, in fact, a stretch to call it a joke really, more like a mean-spirited prodding with a smile, it goes “how are typogra-phers and lawyers work similar?”.
The punchline is “They are both needlessly complex in order to justify their existence.”
In July 2012, scientists who would soon win the Nobel Prize in physics presented their incredi-ble findings regarding data about the theoretical existence of the Higgs boson found in Higgs fields.
This is very high-level physics, this is the sort of theoretical lab work that most of us can vaguely grasp when it is explained well, that has almost no impact on our day to day that we can see, but that might lead scientists to advancements in technologies in ways that I cannot fathom.
In a comic and tragic fall, these future Noble winners made the unforgivable error of using the font Comic Sans in their presentation of the information.
This, of course, had no im-pact at all on the material or its importance to the scientific community.
The Noble Committee did not award the physics prize to someone else because they used GT Walsheim or Graphik Compact Regular in their presentations.
It only allowed the new typographic ped-ants to take to social media and be terrible people about something that means nothing.
“Typography is the art and craft of handling these doubly meaningful bits of information.
A Good typographer handles them in intelligent, coherent, sensitive ways When the type is poorly chosen, when the words say linguistically and what the letters imply visually and disharmonious, dishonest, and of town.” Is our cultish belief in clarity based on anything be-yond belief? Research projects by both Yale professor Shane Frederick and Carnegie Mellon University professor Daniel Oppenheimer both looked at the effects of disfluency on reader re-call and problem-solving by introducing poor typographic choices as a way to make the text harder to read and understand.
They found that people’s ability to solve difficult problems and to recall complex information was increased.
The clarity that we so celebrate in our design systems, in this case, worked against the intended outcomes.
There are probably more ugly pages than beautiful ones in the world.
There are more pages set in Myriad and bad cuts of Times New Roman (Times New Roman Italic is a bizarre thing to think about in terms of how type is named and defined when you think about it) than in beauti-fully designed and executed rich type families with well-developed matrices and useful stylistic sets.
All of this poorly designed and typeset material in the world, and yet we seem to be okay.
The ugliness of the printed pages around us, of the even worse typesetting of the internet, these change nothing.
The vast majority of the objects near me could be typeset differently, they could more closely follow a set of rules that we claim to be very important, and they would look subtly different, but not better, just different.
The claims that our standards about what is a beautiful page stem from our own declarations that we can measure, or possibly “sense,” what is good and bad on a page.
Graphic designs very conservative ideas about what is proper, its glacial paced acceptance of change, especially in typography, do not make them correct, they are not empirically “right.” They are just a set of rules that can be applied, and to use them or not only makes the results different, not better or worse, just different.
 Possibly due to the professionalization of graphic design, the rules governing our work, espe-cially in typography, have grown more and more ossified over time.
The imaginative, creative, daring, expressive works we see in our history have become replaced by rigid rules that allow us to measure what is good and bad, but that limits our outputs.
The Chi-Rho page of the Book of Kells would not be acceptable today, the titles page spreads of Williams Morris’s Child Christopher and Goldilind the Fair, the Josef Müller-Brockmann Grid Systems in Graphic Design, Marion Bantjes I Wonder, Tschichold’s Typographische Gestaltung, Wim Crow-el’s New Alphabet, these would all be under the red pens of typographic pedants.
According to typography textbooks, something around 66 characters per line is considered an “ideal” line length , unless the type is set in columns.
How this idealness affects the text is unclear and untested.
Still, it has been repeated often and repeated in colleges and universi-ties, and in publications numerous times, making it, if not true, then at least agreed upon, and that consensus seems to be enough for the design community.
The en-dash, when read by an audience understands that it replaces the word “to,” so Vancouver–Seattle is read as Vancou-ver to Washington and that a hyphen would mean that the words are joined in some manner, and the longer em-dash would mean the start of a parenthetical, or possibly the dialog in a German play.
While the rules of typography might state that that is all correct, very few read-ers in the world can tell the difference between a hyphen, an em-dash, and an em-dash, the idea that this is general knowledge by most readers is absurd.
At a recent lecture by Robert Bringhurst, one of the learned historians of classical typography, and whose book on the subject is probably the most referenced in the world, he discussed the need for a historically and culturally appropriate typeface selection when typesetting books, especially historical texts.
He argued that with just a little bit of effort, a designer can make sure their work in aesthetically appropriate and that on its own would make the book better in some manner.
But better how and for who is not clear.
A book about Germany in the early days under the Nazi government does not need to be typeset in a German blackletter font, that kind of performance would be distracting from the writing and make the text difficult to read.
A his-torical model for typeface selection is also very limited in time and space.
How would one pick a typeface for a book about the Lascaux cave paintings in France? Obviously, a historical model would not be of use, a national or geographic model would be equally misguided (what does the culture of France after 1500 AD have to do with the that of these cave artists from 19,000 years ago), what would be the correct typeface to use for this? While this can add an interest-ing level of information to a work (when appropriate), it is rarely mandatory and can end up creating a confusing document if the font choice, while technically and historically accurate, becomes difficult to read or lacks value in some other way.
Helvetica might be a historically compelling font choice for a 1950’s Swiss themed cookbook, but the original cuts of Helvetica did not ship with fractions, which would make three- and one-half cups read like 3 1/2 instead of 3? which would make for a bad cookbook.
Typography has not always been so set in its rules and techniques.
In the book Design with
Type Carl Dair declared in the introduction that hyphenation already had a meaning in language (to join words to create a combination of meanings) and that using the same typographic mark to indicate the breaking of a long word at the end of a typeset line of text was a bad idea.
He chose to use a vertical pipe | instead .
This was a book about typography, this was a celebrat-ed designer, and thought that the systems were flexible enough to adapt to this change.
A shared set of rules seems to have become more important to our community than adventure and daring.
We become more like accountants, inserting our data and numbers into a set of binding structures to ensure that the rules have been followed, than like artists trying new things that might fail but that are new and bold and interesting.
What is a book for? While we can make a calming space for the words to be found and seen with ease, we risk making the experience so fluid that the reader can’t take hold on to the ide-as.
We have created an elevator music experience for reading, bland and innocuous, exciting to none, offensive to none.
It is as if music or fiction writing decided that one genre was the right one and that all of the others had broken the rules and did not really count any longer.
The descriptions of work, the ability to work within a prescribed set of rules, the repetition of ac-cepted historical models, these are considered proper modes of work.
When my mother sits down at her laptop and starts to write a letter in Microsoft Word, she is setting type.
When the local church children’s center makes a poster advertising the grand opening of the new playroom, they are setting type.
Perhaps they will use some of the “word art” functions built into the software, creating a waving flag ripple effect across the words “OPEN NOW.” Perhaps they will think that the type is very so small and decide to scale it verti-cally by 200% so it is “more fun” to read.
Maybe it should be a rainbow.
When they do these things, they are setting type in more advanced ways than the vast majority of graphic design has ever had the ability to doing.
They are trying to express an idea using tools and software.
They are doing what they think looks good and what they think is a good idea.
That these ideas break the rules of “good” typography, or that they are less beautiful, interesting, or effective is an opinion, it is one that is shared by many people, it is one that has survived hundreds of years, but it is not a law of nature.
That letterforms should not be vertically stretched is a rule has no reason except that is has history with it.
Letter forms have been stretched and extended for hundreds of years in bibles and other religious texts, but no one is made at the monks for ruin-ing the beautiful letterforms.
Graphic design pop criticism —the bizarre phenomenon of design criticism published in places like the New York Times, but only in the most basic, cliché, and salacious ways possible with breathless takes about what a good idea it is for some company to rebrand, all the while ignoring the terrible treatment of employees by that same company—tends to punch down, the “hilariously” bad designs of small shops are ridiculed for poor design choices, “vernacular” as a description is employed to describe what is understood to be “bad” design, nothing is celebrated in that description, nothing of value is seen, it’s only value is in its kitsch, in is embarrassing failure at following a set of rules that they don’t know about and probably don’t care about.
Typography is serious.
It is no-nonsense, no feelings, no “do what you fee”, it has rules.
Graphic designers as a whole often look for legitimacy for what we do.
The ability to prove that what we are doing is not just making pretty pictures for money, that it is real, it is measurable, that is serious and important I think is one on the reasons that the design industry is so invested in typography and the rules of it.
That we work with systems that are incredibly complex, that we have our own scales of measurements, that our history celebrates the ability to discuss the ogee in Geralds vs French Old Style type, these complexities are how we show everyone looking that what we are doing is very important.
Creating systems that are difficult to understand, us-ing language that is dense and full of jargon, measuring variations in minute details that are sometimes literally impossible to see without a magnifying glass, these are how you create a system that is effectively closed to the outside world and thus prove that your ability to speak and write using the right words, to point at a dash being used and say that it is, in fact, the wrong dash for use in that space, is rare, is valuable, in needed and important.
Higher education happily benefits from this intricacy and opacity.
Most “respectable” design departments have three levels of type education, teaching specialized rules, jargon that is un-necessary, antique units of measure, and a decidedly singular view of the world that is purely Western and uncompromising.
Students will be taught to set type like Robert Bringhurst, then they will be taught to set type like Jan Tschichold (in his early career), then they will be taught to set type like Ed Fella (but without learning why in any real way).
They will learn arbitrary classification systems, and they will learn to “honor” the text and respect the type designer.
If they paid attention in class they will never stretch type, they will never letter-space lowercase, they will repeat and repeat and through that repetition they will reinforce the rules.
Some people are inherently good at using color, some understand space without being taught, but no one has ever been good at typography without study.
It is impossible to know the rules and history of type without being told what they are.
And that is because they are made-up, arbitrary, and complex.
Selwyn Image made a funny joke in his 1877 essay, “On the Unity of Art ,” about how boring and conservative The Royal Academy of Art was by suggesting they change their name to The Royal Academy of Oil Painting.
In that say essay he wrote “For when you begin to realize, that all kinds of invented Form, and Tone, and Colour, are alike true and honorable aspects of Art, you see something very much like a revolution looming ahead of you.” While the graphic design community, generally, has moved away from the Century Guilde’s “Credo in unam Artem, multipartitam, indivisibilem” (“I believe in one art, manifold, indivisible”), the idea of a more welcoming and inclusive view of design and what is acceptable and what is not would be very beneficial to our communities.
Lawyers have built of their systems so completely that it is al-most impossible to navigate without their hired services, if you make a mistake in the legal world the consequences can be very serious, but graphic design is not mandatory, if you make a mistake with your typesetting you will be okay.
If you have widows and orphans on your pages, you will be fine.

The value of strange printers in design
 What is common and boring with time becomes rare and strange.
The elements of the thing that were ubiquitous and unassuming become communicative of a time, or a place, or an idea.
As we become experts with our tools the excitement of what is possible becomes a mild sort of resentment at knowing, in fact, that what is possible is limited.
When we are able/cursed with the ability to see a new piece of work and know how it was made, to see which tools were used, what materials were used, how well they were used, then we may be drawn to the edges of the bell curve; we again start to seek out something new, something novel and un-common to renew our excitement for what is possible.
As our technologies get more and more precise, as the effective resolutions become so high that human eyes can’t differentiate be-tween technologies, as every measurable or discernable difference is seen as something to be fixed, as we flatten out the lumps and bumps, as we smooth the edges of all things, we lose the stories that are in those differences—in the small details that can tell us about our world.
Seeking out tools and techniques that have their own voices, that have their own ways to do things, those voices add to our works, they add content to the narrative, they force us into dif-ferent spaces, they make the work strange and often better.
Digital sound can feel hollow because we sometimes want the messiness of analog records, the hiss and pop which are not planned but are not mistakes.
We add filters and depth of field to our pixel perfect photos because we miss the happy accidents of a non-perfect process, we miss light leaks and the graininess of 1200 iso black and white film.
What at one time we thought were errors in the technologies we eventually learn are, in fact, features.
Printing with older analog or even early digital processes, technologies such as letterpress or duplicators have their own inherent limits and ways of working.
Working with these kinds of tools and not just accepting but building on their particularities creates interesting, authentic, uncommon and more alive work.
The weight and size of paper, the kinds and colors of ink, the ways that the inks work with paper creates obstructions to the simple and obvious solutions that modern tools and techniques offer.
When we look at printed images, we are tricked into seeing a whole and life like object.
With better eye sight (or with a magnifying glass) we see the bizarre reality of the image.
A series of tiny dots in four colors in a radial patter of spots.
Where those dots overlap new colors are made, and when seen from a normal distance without any magnification those dots merge in-to one big blended presentation of color.
Different technologies do this sort of thing somewhat differently from each other, but the vast majority of commercial printing in North America is offset lithography using various line screen densities to show us printed images.
Uncommon printing technologies such as a Risograph use radically different methods of applying color and can create exciting and unexpected results.
In Risograph printing separate “masters” are creat-ed for each color to be printed, but there is no color necessarily associated with that master color template.
While using the printer different colors can be used on the masters creating wildly different color combinations that do not follow traditional color matching methods.
In-stead of printing an image in the traditional cyan, magenta, yellow, and black a designer could switch out the inks for florescent violet, bright orange, red, and forest green creating compel-ling and strange new images.
Risograph printing commonly can only print two colors at a time, an obstruction to current printing expectations, that forces the designer to think of new meth-ods of expression.
Using techniques developed by Kodak in experimentation about color con-stancy with just a two-color print from a Risograph a piece can still express a rich range of col-ors through file manipulation that challenges our misunderstandings about how we perceive colors.
Uncommon technologies can challenge our understandings of color, something we think we understand well but which is so complex and so fascinating.
They are a way to create novel expressions and challenge audiences.
Unless a painting is famous there will always be a small audience for it.
The limitation of this sort of one of a kind communication is that they are in fact on of a kind.
The tools of publica-tion are inherently about mass production, they are made to communicate with an audience, they exist to reproduce and disseminate an idea.
The mass produced are not delicate, they are not precious, they are not rare, they do not gain value through scarcity.
They are made to share, made to be used.
This commonness makes the thing more accessible; its material quality does not demand white gloves to be touched, they can be bent and torn, notes can be taken on them.
Zine culture and other small press projects are not often concerned with efficiency in produc-tion.
In the time it takes to set a single page of text on a letterpress you could print a hundred books on a digital printer.
For ease of access a laser printer/copier is incredibly common and available for use cheaply, but this ease of production can also express a lack of care or quality.
The painstaking time spent in the production and creation of an uncommon object using un-common tools and techniques can express a value that, while maybe at odds with the urgency that zine production often expresses in its aesthetic, communicates the importance of the con-tent and message.
We can add value expressed by care and time spent.

The value of strange and obscure technologies, or cheap and ubiquitous ones, is that they have not been adopted by very exclusive and expensive niche markets in the way that letterpress printing has.
The commercially viability of many letterpress studios relies heavily on the wed-ding industry.
The aesthetic value of heavy printed impressions on thick cotton based papers had become what is understood as traditional, valuable, bespoke.
Duplicators and photocopiers are unlikely to become considered valuable in material quality and in tradition.
The low screen density, the color limitations, and the odd assortment of colors used in Risograph printing creates a tool- and material-based aesthetic that is very specific and very obvious.
Most traditional printed corporate marketing materials that we see out in the world are far more concerned with crispness, with clarity, with repetition without differences—the quality of production is a communication of the quality of the product or service.
Our current mediated view of the world through the high-resolution screens in our daily lives creates an aesthetic that claims to be so clear that we can’t tell the difference between image and reali-ty.
The technology of our hand-held phone cameras presents what looks like a one-to-one repli-cation of our world, the complexity of the process hidden behind user interface.
The processes of how light is received through a lens and then translated to data, rebuilt as signals for a screen that then travel to our eyes to be understood as image and color are hardly known by most.
That this is an act of translation, not a perfect and true capturing of the real thing, and that we act and understand the world like it is not mediated, alters our expectations of other forms of reproduction.
Photography printed in high resolution with colors corrected to the most average of conditions, printed on smooth bright white paper is what we understand to be a re-al and honest representation of the thing that has been photographed.
The low-resolution line screen of the Risograph, the slight shifting of the color registration, the range of colors that we do not expect to see in print, these things make Risograph printing seem unsuitable for the aesthetic of commercial work.
The roughness of the printing, it’s non-perfect clarity, its visual strangeness come to seem like flaws in our pixel perfect, high-res view of the world.
Like silk screening this tool’s fingerprint is too obvious for many designers to feel comfortable using.
The lack of total control over the final output is deemed too much of a sacrifice, too much of a risk to be acceptable.
The uncommon nature of these other kinds of printing make them harder to find, harder to learn to use, harder to work with.
A Risograph can in some ways compete on a price per page measure (depending on the number of colors, etc.), but even in those cases the ability to find a printer to work with on a project as opposed to the ease of finding a full color toner based printer makes the choice of Risograph for a project very hard to justify in terms of efficiency.

Specific tools make specific marks.
Each process of recording or producing has an effect on the final output.
The nature of the tool becomes part of the thing.
These effects have major im-pacts on how we make things, on the choices made by artists and engineers.
The physical reali-ties of the process, of the tool, of the operator, form the edges of what is possible.
A letter-press printer hitting the type with too much backing paper creates a visible and tactile impres-sion in the paper, a misregistered plate creates overlapping colors, a slow film speed used to photograph a fast-moving object blurs the image—these effects are built into the nature of the process.
With digital tools we create glitches, we look for ways to bring imperfection to our otherwise perfect and precise tools.
The fingerprints of different technologies are digitally rec-reated to bring something possibly nostalgic or maybe just more physical and natural into our final outputs.
Faked letterpress impressions, intentional misregistered color, added motion blurs or depth of field, these are commonly added to digitally produced work to create the im-pression of nostalgia or for something approaching authenticity.
But once you know what you are looking for these attempts seem clumsy, lazy, occasionally manipulative, and annoying.
The material nature of a project creates a certain status for it which is bound up in those mate-rial qualities.
A stop sign is its shape, its color, its words, and its materials.
A knitted wool stop sign with all other aspects maintained would be unlikely to stop many cars.
The paper we print on, the binding method, the technology we print with, the material status of those elements affect the object and are part of its narrative.
At higher education institutions in the
US a printed viewbook, using expensive uncoated paper (often Mohawk Superfine), with five or more colors and high-quality photography and printing are a standard element of the story that allows parents to know that this is a real and serious institution.
Uncommon output methods like duplicators with their strange and imperfect reproductions of our world will likely stay on the fringes of production, and that is good.
The commercial design and marketing world already has all of the tools to use, the things they value are reflected in their material choices.
Non-traditional publications can intentionally reflect their values in their material choices as well.
The decision to use technologies that run counter to commercial in-terests, that are rare and strange, that are not the most competitive, communicates important ideas about the work and about those who make those choices.
?
Unreliable Narrators and the Histories of Graphic Design  
 When I taught courses in graphic design history, I would start the first day by getting either chalk or a whiteboard marker and tapping out dozens and dozens of dots in a big oblong cloud onto the appropriate substrate.
I would then draw an x and y-axis saying this represents time, and this represents things that have happened.
I would then connect dots moving along the yaxis, creating a zig-zag of connected dots.
“This is how we tell our stories about history,” I would say.
We connect some of the dots to fit the narrative we like; we ignore the vast number of remaining dots and only pick the ones the conform to our ideas about the world.
The dots, in my mind, were real events that had happened, or very close to what had happened.
The dots, I thought at the time, were real, but the connections we made between them were the fantasy, the narrative, the lies we told ourselves about ourselves to make sense of the world and the things that had come before us.
I have always looked at the history of graphic design as a terri-bly flawed story that connected a tiny and specific group of dots across time while excluding the vast majority of stories, events, ideas, and people.
I was critical, not of the reported events, those seemed reliable, but of how they were interpreted—the statements of fact that seemed to ignore the complex and meaningful stories behind the matter of fact statements of the au-thor.
I accepted the events, but I questioned the conclusions.
While researching for other essays I’ve written this semester on the history of graphic design, as I was looking at primary sources (like a real academic) to avoid allowing my patchwork of assumptions to fill in the narrative plot holes, I realized that I was wrong about a lot of the things that I “knew.” Sometimes I was completely off, sometimes I was in the ballpark at least— attributing a motive to someone’s actions that what likely not there, but the people they hung out with did have those motives.
But getting it wrong is part of learning, questioning our assumptions, our facts, our sources is how we get it not right, but maybe a different kind of wrong.
And those different wrong ways help us understand that there is no right, just lots of ways to understand a thing or an idea—and maybe that we always have to keep trying.
This essay is about a bunch of things I tried to write, but when I began researching the “facts” my initial thesis or idea was simply a bad one.
This forced me to think about what that meant about how I understand the narrative of graphic design history, a narrative I had been telling myself (and my students) for years, not in a daily mantra kind of telling myself, but in a way that informed new ideas and information, colored how that new data had passed through my specific historical lens to be made into something new and different.
Grand national narratives, centuries-old myths, and the little stories we tell ourselves to make sense of the world—these are related through the act of repetition.
Telling a story out loud or in print, if repeated often enough, becomes a very common substitute for the verifiable facts that we hope and assume our histories are based on.
Watson and Crick discovering the struc-ture of DNA, Gutenberg inventing the printing press, the landing at Plymouth Rock, or how cool I am pretty sure I was in high school[1], these are narratives that persist, even when chal-lenged with solid evidence to the contrary, because of the deep grooves in our history that rep-etitions of these stories has dug.
For every story that we repeat because it sounds nice or fits a larger narrative we like, there are a thousand stories we have ignored.
Stories that challenge the dominant narratives, that ask us to question our firmly held beliefs, either personal or ideological, are easier to ignore than to face and attempt to answer or fold into our world and into our expansive narratives.
Some of the earliest heroes celebrated in graphic design’s history, William Morris and the members of the Arts and Crafts movement, are held up as pure and honest, as paragons; their flaws and humanity are ignored to give us a better story.
The contexts of their lives are ignored to tell a simple and smooth story about aesthetics and form; the acceptable norms of the era, omitted from the story, warp the meanings of the words and actions.
They file down very es-sential edges and make an importantly complicated narrative into a children’s story about wallpaper and an elegant disgust at the excess of Victorian aesthetics.
Some stories we repeat, others we erase with omission and time, and others we simply do not want to look at—they are often painful, or they challenge something so fundamental to our modern understanding of the world and undo so many of the knots that tie our stories to the larger narrative that we close our eyes hope they will go away.
And sadly, with omission and time, they might in fact go away.
The story of the Gutenberg bible and the first printing press is a simple narrative about invention and genius, about a transformative technology that changes the entire world, about the impact that one person can have on the world as a whole.
It is fundamental to Western history generally and graphic design history particularly, and it is mostly all untrue.
The less simple version of the story is messy, it is contradictory, it is unclear in many ways, it is full of questions and nuance, and it is crucial that it be known.
The tradi-tionally told story about Gutenberg and the printing press is full of holes, missing threads and leaps of logic that, when questioned, seems obviously problematic.
For the tale to be told as it has been we must ignore that paper existed throughout North Africa and Asia for centuries, that the main library in Córdoba, Spain built in 970 AD had 440,000 books (more than all of France at the time), that movable woodblock printing had existed for centuries in China and Korea, that the European printing press was clearly just a modified grape/wine press, or that Korean printers had been using movable metal type to print for at least 77 years, and that there was not a huge amount of cultural trade between Asia, North Africa, and Western Eu-rope.
But the easier, traditional version of printing history is still told in schools in many places.
I was taught this in the early 2000s, even though the simplistic narrative has been very clearly disproven.

Meggs’ History of Graphic Design was the first design history book I ever read.
It is a very good catalog of a complex topic that tries very hard to make a clear narrative connecting cave paint-ings to April Greiman and everything in between.
Meggs seems to attempt a neutral reporting style of writing, something like a crystal goblet, a frame so thin as to try and be invisible and hold the facts without comment.
This neutrality, while often well-meaning, does not exist in any real way and is more likely to repeat an obscured but very specific world view without un-derstanding that it is doing so.
What this history book does is a very important first step in cre-ating a messy and human telling of the history of graphic design.
It tells the story the way we are most comfortable hearing it, it tells the story how we want others to know it, it is myth-making and only reveals the uncomfortable parts that we are comfortable telling.
Given its sta-tus as the iconic collection of the cannon, it’s true and neutral telling, and its scope, Meggs’ work will always be the story of the dominant ideology that we should always be looking to subvert, or at least complicate.
My own interest in a richer history that subverted the dominant narrative has also led to prob-lems related to poor research and too easily assuming that Meggs was likely on the wrong side of most stories.
I have often done what I would criticize Meggs for, I would use my patchwork of knowledge and research to create a narrative that I thought was in some way better, usually at the expense of the canon and the dominant narratives we work with currently, and of Meggs.

Much of my thinking about Meggs was focused on his chapter on the Arts and Crafts move-ment.
His inclusion of a quote by Walter Crane in his critique of the Century Guild always struck me as interesting: “Walter Crane, always ready with an unequivocal viewpoint, declared that Beardsley’s Morte d’Arthur had mixed the medieval spirit of Morris with a weird ‘Japaneselike spirit of deviltry and the grotesque,’ which Crane thought fit only for the opium den” (Meggs, 162).
It was incredibly racist and seemed to highlight a generational pendulum swing that only further highlighted the xenophobic attitude of the Arts and Crafts movement.
For years I ac-cepted Meggs’ narrative about Crane because it reinforced my patchwork notion that the Arts and Crafts movement was not reacting to technological changes and their impact on the quali-ty of work in England, but that they were, in fact, nationalist bigots reacting to the cultural im-pacts of empire and the changes that had brought.
While doing research on Crane and going back to read the primary sources, I found that oddly Meggs had used that quote without any useful context.
Crane is an Orientalist and bigot that is true, but no more than most of the era.
His full quote is, in fact, praising Beardsley and somehow not as awful as Meggs presents.
I had not thought to question the “facts” of the story, just the interpretation, and conclusions.
I had not considered that misstated or missing context could further a narrative as much as in-clusion or omission of the same content.
“Paper came to Europe in 1280 AD,” a statement of fact from Meggs’ History of Graphic De-sign.
I was sure that this absurd “fact” about the origins of paper and its use and importance in
European history was how Meggs had both introduced the technology and erased its origins in China and its long history in Asia and North Africa.
At boring dinner parties with other graphic designers I would tell this anecdote as proof of the awfulness of the Meggs’ book.
I proposed it as an essay topic that I was sure would align with my interest in subverting our dominate nar-ratives.
The essay was short-lived.
I began researching Meggs’ claim and quickly and easily dis-covered that I was completely wrong about what he had said.
His work on the topic includes an interesting history on the origins of paper and its migration across Asia and North Africa.
The simple story I had made up or misremembered fit the larger narrative that I wanted to tell, it was easy to repeat and was never challenged, and it was wrong.
Meggs’ focus is Eurocentric and excludes any significant exploration of the hundreds of years of design that went with the story of paper, but it is not the flippant and dismissive story that I repeatedly told.
John Baskerville was the topic of another of these dead-end gotcha essays.
In the chronological history of type design, the Transitional step, which featured Baskerville prominently, always seemed like too convenient a story.
The needed steps between Old Style type design and Moderns seemed like a large hole in the record, a shift in thinking that lacked a compelling nar-rative to explain it.
The need for the story to make sense, the need to move the plot along, to get us from Caslon to Bodoni seemed to need its missing link.
Enter the Transitional type style and its famous figurehead John Baskerville.
His type designs were unpopular at the time, ac-cording to Meggs people complained it gave them headaches to read, but they were also so similar to Caslon’s Old English style designs that Benjamin Franklin famously (famously in terms of graphic design history) switched them, and no one noticed.
After his death, Basker-ville’s type was in archives for a hundred years, with no one using them.
That this would be the figure in history that was the face of Transitional style type design made me unsure about the historical value, importance, and accuracy of that narrative.
Baskerville seemed like a conven-ient answer invented after the fact to help move the story along.
Type classification is an unre-liable story that is has been told and retold to highlight different winners and losers over time to value and diminish different people and crafts to fit various interests.
It is an untrustworthy historical tale.
Once again, I did not question the veracity of the “facts,” just the reading of them.
I was certain that the flaw was that Baskerville was not what was claimed, and that meant something larger and more important to the history of type design.
But inside of the model that I had accepted as accurate, John Baskerville is not the only Transitional type de-signer in that chronological category.
Even if Baskerville’s importance was overstated (for which I have no real evidence), many others existed.
In another failed but revived and revised essay I wrote about the problems that racism created in our modern reading and understanding of William Morris and the Arts and Crafts movement.
My initial thesis was built once again on an acceptance of the facts, as stated in Meggs and others, but with a new critique of the conclusions drawn from them.
Victorian England was a huge empire that was built on a racist colonial impulse shared by most of the English popula-tion.
Arts and Crafts members like Walter Crane made very clearly bigoted remarks, the Arts and Crafts output was often very nostalgic and fanciful in its retelling of stories about an ideal England, and the members seemed to reject very forcefully any acceptance of Japanese art in-fluences on the younger members of the Century Guild.
All of this informed my ideas about the likely problems that a blanket, unexamined acceptance of the theories and methods of the Arts and Crafts movement posed.
Once again, I was wrong about some key assumptions.
In reading primary sources, I discovered that Meggs’ framing of Walter Cranes comments was misleading—he was an Orientalist to be sure and shared the cultural racism of the era and place, but was arguably not an outlier in the context of the time that should draw the spotlight.
Crane’s comments about Aubrey Beardsley were also taken out of context.
Crane himself was an early adopter of many techniques taken from Japanese printmaking and was, in fact, com-plementary to Beardsley and his work.
I discovered that William Morris was a better person than I assumed—he shared much of Crane’s (and all of Victorian England’s) bigotry, but his so-cialist ideals filtered his view to see class-based issues as more important than those of race.
John Ruskin, celebrated in much of our graphic design history and especially celebrated by Meggs was in fact an extraordinary bigot.
Meggs omits this important fact about the thinking and philosophy of Ruskin, one of the main characters of the movement, perhaps to protect his celebrated status.
In this case I was wrong again in my patchwork of understanding; some ide-as held up, others were reformed, others abandoned for being false.
The New Typography of the 1930s is another area of graphic design history that seems full of holes, misunderstandings, and misrepresentations.
Its aesthetic resilience may say more about its absorption and success in the commercial areas of the industry than anything else.
A clear understanding of why one of its principal architects, Jan Tschichold, abandoned the movement and its philosophies is almost never discussed.
What it means to our history and philosophy that the New Typography was so readily consumed by commercial interests is not included in our discussions of the works and the culture of the movement.
Kurt Schwitters is described in design histories as the designer in the new typographic movement that also tried to make a commercial business out of the new ideas and aesthetics.
His Merz work and his advertising for Pelikan ink are featured in most graphic design history texts.
My essay about Schwitters was going to focus on the failure of his Pelikan ink ads as pieces of communication.
When I considered the ideas and execution of the ads through a modern un-derstanding of communications, and idea I thought I cared about that topic, but it turns out in fact I do not.
I abandoned this essay topic because I don’t agree with my original thesis, and I might even think the opposite of it.
Maybe one day I will write an essay about how great it is that Merz made awful marketing materials as commercial design.
In this case, the essay failed not because of the facts of the narrative or its commonly understood historical interpretation but because I made the choice that every author of histories does, to ignore an aspect I find to be uninteresting.

Johanna Drucker and Emily McVarish wrote what I think is the best graphic design history text, Graphic Design History: A Critical Guide.
They consider context and apply useful critical theory methods to their telling.
Aside from that, most graphic design history books seem to attempt to be neutral catalogs without a strong point of view, they attempt to be objective: the crystal goblet.
Steven Heller has developed an iconic status as the industry historian employing a crys-tal goblet method, attempting a neutral reporting in his archiving of the industry’s history.
And this is incredibly important work, Heller has highlighted and celebrated important designers who might have been lost to our memories.
Designers like Ladislav Sutnar whose work lost popularity in his later working years might have been forgotten if not for Heller and his re-search.

Heller’s work to document is fantastically important.
I am very glad that it is being done, but his archives are being mistaken by our industry as an actual history, as an academic study, as something beyond a surface level reading of form and simple narrative.
This is not his respon-sibility to correct, it is the responsibility of our academics to write those compelling and com-plex stories, the deep and thoughtful histories, the challenging theoretical readings of what might seem like a simple story.
Claiming no point of view is a point of view, to repeat the common narrative is to reinforce the dominant cultural views of the world.
Claiming a strong point of view allows us to challenge the assumptions we know we have, and the ones we might not know about yet.
All histories focusing on the story of graphic design as a tool of a wage-labor system are inher-ently conservative in their world view.
The limiting of what is worth reporting, what is worth researching, and who and what is omitted is made by our world views and our acceptance of them or our experiences with other modes of thought and critical response.
It is understanda-ble in non-academic writing that this would not be a consideration, that the effects of the filter on how the world is understood and then reported would be assumed to be shared by the reader.
A lot of graphic design history is the footnote of another “larger” history that we ignore to fo-cus on the small thing that we are concerned with at that moment.
The development of the Carolingian minuscule is a fascinating story, but to read most accounts of it you might think that was the most interesting thing happening at the time and not consider why Charlemagne would think this worth developing in the larger story of Europe and the Holy Roman Empire.
I am an unreliable historian, but also no historians are reliable.
That is the nature of history, there are no truths, all facts are debatable, what has been told is not more important than what has been omitted.
This critique can sound outlandish, but it shouldn’t—we just haven’t talked about our histories as more than simple narrative and formal style guide in most of our educations.
We typically have one or two “History of Design” courses that are intended to cover everything from cave paintings to today.
Those same courses cover form and theory.
Imagine an English department with one or two courses about all of the books ever written, and also composition.
We need more promotion of our theoretical and historical writings by the academy.
Steven Heller (as important as he is) should not be the most famous living design historian in graphic design.
He is a pop history writer, not an academic historian.
I saw one of our industry’s best design historians, Johanna Drucker, speak at Typecon in 2010.
Her talk was very good, and was met with confusion from the audience.
We lack the structures to consider our history in a deep and academic way, we seem incapable of a feminist reading of the Bauhaus, we can’t conceive of a Marxist reading of Massimo Vignelli’s American Airlines identity work, we are stuck on the surface of something very important and very interesting.
Graphic design history is important, not because it is deserving of its rightful place in some sort of library, but because we continue to practice what was learned, invented, refined, and devel-oped still today, but we don’t know why any of it happened.
We have simple stories that con-tinue as unchallenged narrative, one that is most likely wrong in lots of very important ways.
Work cited.
Meggs, Philip B., Alston W.
Purvis, and Philip B.
Meggs.
2006.
Meggs’ history of graphic design.
  ?
Communities, zines, and the value of design (sort of) 
 I had long considered artificial intelligence to be one of the primary hurdles that graphic de-signers and other creative commercial practitioners (editors, photographers, writers, etc.) would have to get over, or at least get around in some manner in the very near future.
Adobe, the company that makes the primary tools for graphic design work, is now one of the leaders in machine learning and AI in the world.
The same people making our tools are making new tools to replace us.
And they are very good at it.
I had originally planned to study this potential im-pact, to try and map out a way forward in this new reality of machines doing much of the work that we have considered uniquely human.
While planning that research project, while defining categories and subtopics in my head, while thinking about the range of work and the kinds of people that work is done for and with and by who, I changed my mind about the project.
I do believe that much of the larger commercial work being done by designers will be replaced by machines, by very good algorithms that will make something indistinguishable from a some-what talented and trained human, by systems that will autogenerate something “close enough.” But I think that those impacts are likely to only be felt in part (an economically im-portant part) of the space where we work.
It is the part that pays the most money and because of this financial consequence will be very difficult to live with, but it is not all that this work is.
Work with small, local, community-based, non-profit, non-corporate groups and individuals will not likely be as affected by the power of these algorithms.
Design may have to become much more local, much more of a community resource, much more accessible to those with small or no budgets, and thus will be much more helpful.
When we humans see the moon near the horizon it can very often look enormous.
A huge glowing ball at the edge of the world, that as it rises gets smaller and smaller.
But the moon’s orbit is not ovoid, it is a near perfect circle; the moon is never really further or closer to us.
The moon does not look bigger because it is closer, it’s a trick of the brain.
When we see things on the horizon, our brains know them to be far away and will play with our understanding of scale.
Our brains can’t really conceive of the size of the moon or its distance, the scales are just not understandable.
I have been wondering if our collective climate change denial might be based in a similar malfunction of our brains.
The scale of the climate crisis is just too large to under-stand.
When we go out into the world it is massive, it stretches out farther than we can see.
In the forests of western Massachusetts or Vermont, one could get lost for days, or lost forever.
I know that the scale of this problem is not something that I can personally change, it is not in the power of an individual to make the needed changes to our ways of life, it is outside of my abilities to effect change.
This realization can still, occasionally, paralyze me with a sense of dread deep within me, a tightness in my stomach surrounded by a low panic.
I have found that accepting that I am mostly powerless in the face of the scale of the climate crisis lets me focus my energies, empathy, and hopes on smaller scale local and community issues where I can maybe make something better for someone.
The day to day hardships we face are not less-ened because they are common and mundane.
The need to be safe, secure, seen, heard, cared for, these are things we can do, things that will make an impact, things that need to be done.

Ian Lynam recently used a very old joke structure to ask, “How do you make a small fortune in publishing? You start with a large fortune.” The same joke format exists for almost every commercial venture you can name, so much so that it makes one wonder if it is not the indus-try in question that is the flaw in the system, but the system that it is trying to work inside of.
Community based publishing (and zines in particular) often has the freedom of never intending to make a profit.
The “everyday compromises” (Chidgey, 28) of a traditional commercial ven-ture can be avoided.
If you start out never intending to make money, in fact knowing that you are likely going to lose money, you cannot fail.
Zines and other type of small press publications regardless of content can be read as a form of protest by their nature and underlying production and distribution models.
They use the “tools and language of the market in a counter way” (Chidgey, 28).
The supremacy of concepts like profit, efficiency, marketability are often totally ignored in these community publishing pro-jects.
The writers, editors, designers, publishers and others work together without profit mo-tives, with the freedom to say and make what they want to say and make without worry and without compromise.

When we consider the value of a statement we read, we understand much more than just the words as written by the author(s).
The writing, the quality of the design, the material, and nu-merous other things multiply together to create each act of reading.
The intent of the author and the message received are hardly ever a one for one transaction.
A published piece carries more weight.
That someone felt that the content deserved to be read by an audience, that someone edited the words, that someone spent time and energy laying it out in a format that is not a standard Microsoft Word template, that money and time were spent committing all of that to paper is meaningful, impactful, and has cultural value.
The investment of time and en-ergy by someone implies a value.
The profit motive of most publishers means that who they can afford to publish is very limited in scope.
A story must be able to resonate with or excite in some manner a large enough audience to recoup the cost of publication and to ideally, in this method, make a profit.
Without that primary limiter to whose voice has “value” small press and zine publishers can amplify hyper local content, can publish the words of a small group for a small group.

Recently while talking about my interest in zines and small press publishing, I was asked “oh are you part of the scene?” My age, location, and social status generally, make me, decidedly, not a part of the scene.
Much of the success of small press and zine culture comes from a trusted sharing model for everything from writing to designing to printing to distribution.
These elements are organized around non-commercial systems of community and sharing of re-sources.
You can’t buy your way in.
In 2007 I discovered a group of architects and designers working together in a group called Pro-ject M.
They said that designers, architects, writers, and editors, these cultural makers, tended to have a larger voice in the world than most, and that we should use that outsized voice to make the world a better place.
They paraphrased uncle Ben from Spider-Man comics and said “with great power comes great responsibility.” The first project I saw that they did was Buy A Meter, a short run one color 12-page newspaper raising money for residents in
Greenboro, Alabama.
The project aimed at raising money to get residents a hookup valve to the municipal water supply to provide clean drinking water.
I was always struck by the compact-ness of this project.
It was hyper local, it affected one part of one community, it had real im-pacts immediately, and it had larger less obvious impacts.
This helped people, it was incredibly solvable in the most pressing way (they could measure how many houses did not have the hookup, multiply that by the cost of the hookup and then aim to raise that much) and it brought into question larger points like why would this system punish the poor members of the com-munity in such a way? The project also managed to annoy parts of the local community frus-trated with the arrogance of these out of town, out of state graphic designers thinking that they could solve problems that no one else could.

The Project M Pielab project also faced the same out of town savior problems.
What was in-tended to be a place to talk about how design could affect and help the community also lacked connections to the community.
The reasons people choose to help others are often very com-plex, there is no pure intent.
It makes someone feel useful or good about themselves, it is mandated by their religion, it will fill out a CV well, or some other common and boring motiva-tion.
Trying to fix what you think is wrong is never the right place to start.
You need to learn about the thing, the place, the people, the complexities of the place and time.
Clever slogans and self-indulgent design work never solve the problem if you haven’t asked what the problem is.
Community based local projects, where you live, where you have a stake in the place and an interest in the people, that is where graphic design can make a real difference.
When I was in my undergraduate studies program in cultural anthropology we learned about the Tiv.
The Tiv live in West Africa, and we studied them because of a very complex cul-turaleconomic system they use.
The Tiv have a multi-layer system of trade, food can be traded for food, and brass-rods that denote cultural importance can be traded for other brass-rods in the same level of economic importance.
The elements of each level can be traded only in that level, you cannot trade food for cultural status, you cannot trade livestock for political status.
When European trade attempted to force wage labor ideas with a single economic unit (dol-lars) onto the culture they fought back.
The idea that cultural importance could be valued in the same manner as the purchase of a chicken was absurd and insulting.
In debates among Canadian environmental advocates a similar debate occurs.
How do you val-ue Canada’s boreal rain forest? A proposal to give the forests a dollar value based on its value as a carbon sink has created debate.
The argument is that these forests are invaluable, that you cannot measure their importance with just money.
Is the value of my MFA education really the same as 60,000 donuts? Is the Graff Diamonds watch valued at 55 million dollars of the same importance as cleaning up the water supply of Flint Michigan? The acceptance that all things can be purchased, that all things can be measured in terms of a dollar amount is the most depressing thing we seem to have accepted in our modern lives.
The part of being a graphic designer that I find the hardest to reconcile is that I think this work is incredibly important, incredibly valuable, and can really help to solve problems.
But it hardly ever does that, it is hardly ever used in important ways, its value is misspent and misdirected as a tool for marketing.
But the realities of our system are such that we must trade our skills and labor for money.
We must make concessions, we must make compromises, and we may very well end up using our skills to sell the services or products of something or someone we find repellant.
The non-commercial, the anti-commercial even, nature of zines and community publishing pro-jects is a great example of how the tools and skills of graphic design be used in positive ways that values the work differently.
These projects sidestep the traditional modes of design work.
There is no client needed, there is no need to be clever, no need to try and convince someone of something, no need to be marketable to an audience, no ROI to consider.
The designer can self-publish or publish others; it is wide open.
For all of this, it is also very hard to do the needed work.
It is hard to be part of a community.
I think of the lyrics of Gillian Welsh’s song Oh look at Miss Ohio: “Says I wanna do right, but not right now.” I wonder if my altruism can stand up to any real challenges to its authenticity, or if I will abandon things when they get complicated, because people are complicated and local community work is working with people.
Chidgey, Red.
“Free, Trade: Distribut

